# Lecture
## Defining a Typical Class (Terminology)
```java
public class Dog {
	public int weightInPounds;
	public static String binomen = "Canis familiaris";

	/** One integer constructor for dogs. */
	public Dog(int w) {
		weightInPounds = w;
	}

	public void makeNoise() { // Non-static method, a.k.a. Instance Method. Method with a self pointer.
		if (weightInPounds < 10) {
			System.out.println("yip!");
		} else if (weightInPounds < 30) {
			System.out.println("bark.");
		} else {
			System.out.println("woooof!");
		}
	}
}
```

## Instantiating a Class Terminology
```java
public class DogLauncher {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
        Dog smallDog;               // *Declaration* of a Dog variable
        new Dog(20);                // *Instantiation* of the Dog class as a Dog Object
        smallDog = new Dog(5);      // *Instantiation* and *Assignment*
        Dog hugeDog = new Dog(150); // D, I and A
        hugeDog.makeNoise();        // *Invocation* of the 150 lb Dog's makeNoise method.
	}
}
```

## Static vs. Non-static
Key differences between static and non-static (a.k.a. instance) methods:
- Static methods are invoked using the class name, e.g. `Dog.makeNoise()`;
- Instance methods are invoked using an instance name, e.g. `maya.makeNoise()`;
- Static methods can’t access “my” instance variables, because there is no “me”.

## `public static void main(String[] args)`
```java
public class ArgsDemo {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		System.out.println(args[0]);
	}
}
```
```sh
$ java ArgsDemo hello some args
hello
```

- `public`: So far, all of our methods start with this keyword.
- `static`: It is a static method, not associated with any particular instance.
- `void`: It has no return type.
- `main`: This is the name of the method.
- `String[] args`: This is a parameter that is passed to the main method.

## Using Libraries
There are tons of Java libraries out there.
- In 61B, we will provide all needed libraries. These include (but are not limited to):
  - The built-in Java libraries (e.g. Math, String, Integer, List, Map)
  - The Princeton standard library (e.g. StdDraw, StdAudio, In)

As a programmer, you’ll want to leverage existing libraries whenever possible.
- Saves you the trouble of writing code.
- Existing widely used libraries are (probably) will probably be less buggy.
- … but you’ll have to spend some time getting acquainted with the library.

Best ways to learn how to use an unfamiliar library:
- Find a tutorial (on the web, youtube, etc.) for the library.
- Read the documentation for the library (Java docs often very good).
- Look at example code snippets that use the library.

## [The Princeton Standard Library](http://introcs.cs.princeton.edu/java/stdlib/)
Makes various things much easier:
- Getting user input.
- Reading from files.
- Making sounds.
- Drawing to the screen.
- Getting random numbers.

# 1. Introduction to Java
## 1.2 Objects
### Statics
> The code we want to run must be inside `public static void main(String [] args)`.

A class that uses another class is sometimes called a "client" of that class, i.e. `DogLauncher` is a client of `Dog`. Neither of the two techniques is better: Adding a main method to Dog may be better in some situations, and creating a client class like DogLauncher may be better in others.

### Instance Variables and Object Instantiation
Some key observations and terminology:

- An `Object` in Java is an instance of any class.
- The `Dog` class has its own variables, also known as *instance variables* or *non-static variables*. These must be declared inside the class, unlike languages like Python or Matlab, where new variables can be added at runtime.
- The method that we created in the `Dog` class did not have the `static` keyword. We call such methods *instance methods* or *non-static methods*.
- To call the `makeNoise` method, we had to first instantiate a `Dog` using the `new` keyword, and then make a specific `Dog` bark. In other words, we called `d.makeNoise()` instead of `Dog.makeNoise()`.
- Once an object has been instantiated, it can be assigned to a declared variable of the appropriate type, e.g. `d = new Dog()`;
- Variables and methods of a class are also called *members* of a class.
- Members of a class are accessed using *dot notation*.

### Constructors in Java
```java
public class Dog {
    ...
    public Dog(int w) {
        weightInPounds = w;
    }
    ...
}
```
The constructor with signature `public Dog(int w)` will be invoked anytime that we try to create a `Dog` using `new Dog(w)`.

### Class Methods vs. Instance Methods
Java allows us to define two types of methods:

- Class methods, a.k.a. static methods.
- Instance methods, a.k.a. non-static methods.

```java
public static Dog maxDog(Dog d1, Dog d2) {
    if (d1.weightInPounds > d2.weightInPounds) {
        return d1;
    }
    return d2;
}

public Dog maxDog(Dog d2) {
    if (this.weightInPounds > d2.weightInPounds) {
        return this;
    }
    return d2;
}

/** Exercise 1.2.1 */
public static Dog maxDog(Dog d1, Dog d2) {
    if (weightInPounds > d2.weightInPounds) { 
    // weightInPounds -> cannot make a static reference to the  non-static field weightInpounds.
        return this; // cannnot use this in a static context.
    }
    return d2;
}
```

### Static Variables

While Java technically allows you to access a static variable using an instance name, it is bad style, confusing, and in my opinion an error by the Java designers.

# Q&A
- [Initialize variable with a value](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=491)
  - There is not a universial answer. It's ok to rely on default (no value specificed). It depends on your program's organization.
- [How to conceptualize the data type of a class's constructors.](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=572)
  - We will talk about this topic 3 weeks later. But you cannot change `object` class to make below code compile.
```java
...
	public Dog(int w) { // Behold there is no data type specification
		weightInPounds = w;
	}
...
    public static void main(String[] args){
        Dog d2;
        System.out.println(d2); // variable 'd2' might not have been initialized.
    }
```
- [Nulls in Array](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=825)
  - Nulls in an Array is nothing.
  - You can have a null dog in the middle.

- [Confirme understanding about instance attribute](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=991)
- [`new Dog(25)` will return a pointer](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=1041)
- [Class in different folders](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=1092)
  - `package` and `import`
- [Use `this` to call other constructor](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=1270)
- [Lecture video problem](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=1359)
- [Java funtions are 'pass-by-value' or 'pass-by-reference'?](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=1511)
  - If pass-by-reference, the change should persist after the call.
  - If pass-by-value, the cahnge will not persist.
  - Java is pass-by-value. Lecture 4
- [Implicit notation](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=1747)
  - Java assumes methods without dot notation are in the same class you call it.
- [Declaration without `public` keyword](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=2004)
  - `public` means ANY CLASS can use this variable.
  - Without it, other classes cannot access it.
- [`Dog d3`, just like `int x`, creates nothing but an alias](https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=2472)
  - An instance's attributes are default to be `Null` if you don't assign it.
```java
    ...
    public String name;
    ...
    System.out.print(name); // you will get Null
```
- (Lanugage usage)[https://youtu.be/M5LUOLo4k3Y?t=3110]
  - In Java, everything is a class.
  - Never use `go to` in any language. It results what people called Spaghetti Code (unstructured and difficult-to-maintain source code).

# Overview
- **Client Programs and Main Methods**. A Java program without a main method cannot be run directly using the `java` command. However, its methods can still be invoked using the `main` method of another class.
- **Class Declaration**. 
  - Java classes can contain methods and/or variables. 
  - We say that such methods and variables are “members” of the class. 
  - Members can be *instance* members or *static* members. 
  - Static members are declared with the static keyword. Instance members are any members without the static keyword.
- **Class Instantiation**. Instantiating a class is almost always done using the `new` keyword, e.g. `Dog d = new Dog()`. An instance of a class in Java is also called an “Object”.
- **Array Instantiation**. Arrays are also instantiated using the `new` keyword. For example `int[] arr = new int[10]` If we have an array of Objects, e.g. `Dog[] dogarray`, then each element of the array must also be instantiated separately.
- **Static vs. Instance methods**. The distinction between static and instance methods is incredibly important. 
  - Instance methods are actions that can only be taken by an instance of the class (i.e. a specific object), 
  - whereas static methods are taken by the class itself. 
  - An instance method is invoked using a reference to a specific instance, e.g. `d.bark()`, 
  - whereas static methods should be invoked using the class name, e.g. Math.sqrt(). Know when to use each.
- **Static variables**. Variables can also be static. Static variables should be accessed using the class name, e.g. `Dog.binomen` as opposed to `d.binomen`. Technically Java allows you to access using a specific instance, but we strongly encourage you not to do this to avoid confusion.
- **The `this` keywor**d. Inside a method, we can use the `this` keyword to refer to the current instance. This is equivalent to `self` in Python.

# Exercises
## C Level
1. Complete the exercises from the online textbook.
2. In the below code what would the blank variable name have to be in order for the code to compile

```java
 public class Human{
   int eyes;
   public Human(int num){
     eyes = num;
   }
  }
```

## B Level
1. Below is the Dog class.

```java
 public class Dog{
   public void bark(){
     System.out.println("Moo");
   }
   public static void runFast(){
     System.out.println("Ruff Run");
   }
 }
```
Which of the following lines, if any, would cause an error.
```java
 Dog poppa = new Dog();
 poppa.bark();
 Dog.bark();            // x
 poppa.runFast();       // x
 Dog.runFast();
```