# Testing and Selection Sort
## Ad Hoc ('This') Testing
Why are you looping through the entire array? Why don't you just check if the arrays are equal using `==`? 

The reason is, when we test for equality of two objects, we cannot simply use the `==` operator. The `==` operator compares the literal bits in the memory boxes, e.g. `input == expected` would test whether or not the addresses of `input` and `expected` are the same, not whether the values in the arrays are the same. You could also use the built-in method `java.util.Arrays.equals` instead of a loop.

## JUnit Testing
Instead of wrtting your own array comparision, the `org.junit` library provides a number of helpful methods and useful capabilities for simplifying the writing of tests.
```java
public static void testSort() {
    String[] input = {"i", "have", "an", "egg"};
    String[] expected = {"an", "egg", "have", "i"};
    Sort.sort(input);
    org.junit.Assert.assertArrayEquals(expected, input);
}
```

## Selection Sort
1. Find the smallest item.
2. Move it to the front.
3. Selection sort the remaining N-1 items (without touching the front item).

We could mathematically prove the correctness of this sorting algorithm on any arrays by using the concept of *invariants* that was originally introduced in chapter 2.4.

- tag and string compare
- function with the same name
```java
/** Returns the smallest string in x. 
  * @source Got help with string compares from https://goo.gl/a7yBU5. */
public static String findSmallest(String[] x) {
    String smallest = x[0];
    for (int i = 0; i < x.length; i += 1) {
        int cmp = x[i].compareTo(smallest); //
        if (cmp < 0) {                      // -1 0 1
            smallest = x[i];
        }
    }
    return smallest;
}

/** Sorts strings destructively starting from item start. */
private static void sort(String[] x, int start) {   // helper function can have the same name with more (or less) parameters.
   int smallestIndex = findSmallest(x);
   swap(x, start, smallestIndex);
   sort(x, start + 1);
}
```

Of note is the fact that I debugged the code at a higher level of abstraction than you might have otherwise, which I achieve by using `Step Over` more than `Step Into`. As discussed in lab 3, debugging at a higher level of abstraction saves you a lot of time and energy, by allowing you to compare the results of entire function calls with your expectation.

## Reflections on the Development Process
- Trying to hold too much in your brain at once is a recipe for disaster at worst, and slow progress at best.
- Having a set of automated tests and dividving and conquer helps reduce this cognitive load.
- Lastly, tests make it easier to refactor your code.

## Better JUnit
- JUnit has many more such methods other than `assertEquals`, such as `assertFalse`, `assertNotNull`, `fail`, and so forth, and they can be found in the official [JUnit documentation](http://junit.org/junit4/javadoc/4.12/org/junit/Assert.html).
- "test annotation". To do this, we:
  - Precede each method with `@org.junit.Test` (no semi-colon).
  - Change each test method to be non-static.
  - Remove our `main` method from the `TestSort` class.
- This annotation based approach has several advantages:
  - No need to manually invoke tests.
  - All tests are run, not just the ones we specify.
  - If one test fails, the others still run.
  - A count of how many tests were run and how many passed is provided.
  - The error messages on a test failure are much nicer looking.
  - If all tests pass, we get a nice message and a green bar appears, rather than simply getting no output.
- "import statement"
  - We first add the import statement import `org.junit.Test`; to the top of our file. After doing this, we can replace all instances of `@org.junit.Test` with simply `@Test`.
  - We then add our second import statement `import static org.junit.Assert.*`. After doing this, anywhere we can omit anywhere we had `org.junit.Assert`. `org.junit.Assert.assertEquals(expected2, actual2);` -> `assertEquals(expected2, actual2);`

# [TDD is dead. Long live testing.](http://david.heinemeierhansson.com/2014/tdd-is-dead-long-live-testing.html)

Maybe it was necessary to use test-first as the counterintuitive ram for breaking down the industry's sorry lack of automated, regression testing. Maybe it was a parable that just wasn't intended to be a literal description of the day-to-day workings of software writing. But whatever it started out as, it was soon since corrupted. Used as a hammer to beat down the nonbelievers, declare them unprofessional and unfit for writing software. A litmus test.

I think that's the direction we're heading. Less emphasis on unit tests, because we're no longer doing test-first as a design practice, and more emphasis on, yes, slow, system tests. (Which btw do not need to be so slow any more, thanks to advances in parallelization and cloud runner infrastructure).

Rails can help with this transition. Today we do nothing to encourage full system tests. There's no default answer in the stack. That's a mistake we're going to fix. But you don't have to wait until that's happening. Give Capybara a spin today, and you'll have a good idea of where we're heading tomorrow.

But first of all take a deep breath. We're herding some sacred cows to the slaughter right now. That's painful and bloody. TDD has been so successful that it's interwoven in a lot of programmer identities. TDD is not just what they do, it's who they are. We have some serious deprogramming ahead of us as a community to get out from under that, and it's going to take some time.

The worst thing we can do is just rush into another testing religion. I can just imagine the golden calf of "system tests only!" right now. Please don't go there.

Yes, test-first is dead to me. But rather than dance on its grave, I'd rather honor its contributions than linger on the travesties. It marked an important phase in our history, yet it's time to move on.

Long live testing.

# Q&A
- [`==`](https://youtu.be/51YjFL6nBFo?t=1384)
  - `is` in python equivalent to `==` in Java
    - These check memory addresses.
  - `==` in python equivalent to `.equals` in Java
    - In python we write a `__eq__` function.
    - In Java we write a equals() function.
    - These check the boolean return value of a special function written by a class author.
- [Functions with the same name and arguments but diferent types](https://youtu.be/51YjFL6nBFo?t=1699)
  - Types here are arguments types
- [Invariants](https://youtu.be/51YjFL6nBFo?t=1753)
  - Lecture 5
  - Something is always true.
- [Helper function should be private/public](https://youtu.be/51YjFL6nBFo?t=1915)
  - In general it's private.
- [System.out.println(5 + 6 + "hi" + 5 + 6)](https://youtu.be/51YjFL6nBFo?t=2062)
  - `11hi56` evaluate from left to right
- [where you put helper function](https://youtu.be/51YjFL6nBFo?t=2123)
  - right above it.
- [static class in java visualizer](https://youtu.be/51YjFL6nBFo?t=2197)
  - We will discuss this later. You need do this in java visualizer.
  - `import static` used for import static function.
- [equal](https://youtu.be/51YjFL6nBFo?t=2249)
  - If a class doesn't define `equals`, and you call equals, what will happen?
  - `this == obj`
- [define a varible as a test class varible](https://youtu.be/51YjFL6nBFo?t=2483)
  - You can do this so you can use it in every function in the test class.
  - `final` means this can never change.
- [why the col, row like this in proj0](https://youtu.be/51YjFL6nBFo?t=2556)
  - x,y convention. It's arbitary.
  - It's a i,j vs x,y order. (Matrix vs Cartesian)
- [string class](https://youtu.be/51YjFL6nBFo?t=2949)
  - The `equals` method will compare every character in two strings.