# Overview
**Primitives** Primitives are representations of information. There are 8 primitive types in Java: byte, short, int, long, float, double, boolean, and char. Each primitive is represented by a certain number of bits. For example, ints are 32 bit primitives, while bytes are 8 bit primitives.

**Declaring Primitives** When we declare a variable to be a primitive (i.e. `int x;`), we set aside enough memory space to hold the bits (in this case, 32). We can think of this as a box holding the bits. Java then maps the variable name to this box. Say we have a line of code `int y = x;` where `x` was defined before. Java will copy the bits inside the `x` box into the bits in the `y` box.

**Creating Objects** When we create an instance of a class using the `new` keyword, _Java creates boxes of bits for each field_, where the size of each box is defined by the type of each field. For example, 
- if a Walrus object has an int variable and a double variable, then Java will allocate two boxes totaling 96 bits (32 + 64) to hold both variables. 
- These will be set to a default value like 0. 
- The constructor then comes in and fills in these bits to their appropriate values. 
- The return value of the constructor will return the location in memory where the boxes live, usually an address of 64 bits. 
- This address can then be stored in a variable with a “reference type.”

**Reference Types** If a variable is not a primitive type, then it is a reference type. When we declare object variables, we use reference type variables to store the location in memory of where an object is located. Remember this is what the constructor returns. A reference type is always a box of size 64 bits. Note that the variable does not store the entire object itself!

**Golden Rule of Equals** For primitives, the line `int y = x` copies the bits inside the `x` box into the `y` box. For reference types, we do the exact same thing. In the line `Walrus newWalrus = oldWalrus;`, we copy the 64 bit address in the `oldWalrus` box into the `newWalrus` box. So we can think of this golden rule of equals (GroE) as: when we assign a value with equals, we are just copying the bits from one memory box to another!

**Parameter Passing** Say we have a method `average(double a, double b)`. This method takes two doubles as parameters. Parameter passing also follows the GRoE, i.e. when we call this method and pass in two doubles, we copy the bits from those variables into the parameter variables.

**Array Instantiation.** Arrays are also Objects, and are also instantiated using the new keyword. This means declaring an array variable (i.e. `int[] x;`) will create a 64-bit reference type variable that will hold the location of this array. Of course, right now, this box contains the value null, as we have not created the array yet. The `new` keyword for arrays will create the array and return the location of this array in memory. So by saying `int[] x = new int[]{0, 1, 2, 3, 4};`, we set the location of this newly created array to the variable x. Note that the size of the array was specified when the array was created, and cannot be changed!

**IntLists.** Using references, we recursively defined the `IntList` class. `IntLists` are lists of integers that can change size (unlike arrays), and store an arbitrarily large number of integers. Writing a `size` helper method can be done with either recursion or iteration.

# Mystery of the Walrus (Java internal mechanism)
## Declaring a Variable
The Java language provides no way for you to know the location of a variable. This feature of Java is a tradeoff:
- Hiding memory locations from the programmer gives you less control, which prevents you from doing certain [types of optimizations](http://www.informit.com/articles/article.aspx?p=2246428&seqNum=5).
- However, it also avoids [a large class of very tricky programming errors](http://www.informit.com/articles/article.aspx?p=2246428&seqNum=1).
- In the modern era of very low cost computing, this tradeoff is usually well worth it. As an analogy, you do not have direct control over your heartbeat. While this restricts your ability to optimize for certain situations, it also avoids the possibility of making stupid errors like accidentally turning it off.

> As the wise Donald Knuth once said: "We should forget about small efficiencies, say about 97% of the time: premature optimization is the root of all evil".

Java **does not write anything** into the reserved box when a variable is declared. In other words, there are no default values. As a result, the Java compiler prevents you from using a variable until after the box has been filled with bits using the `=` operator.

## The Golden Rule of Equals (GRoE)
When you write y = x, you are telling the Java interpreter to **copy the bits from `x` into `y`**. This simple idea of copying the bits is true for ANY assignment using `=` in Java.

## Reference Types
There are 8 primitive types: byte, short, int, long, float, double, boolean, char. Everything else, including arrays, is not a primitive type but rather a `reference type`.

When we instantiate an Object using `new` (e.g. Dog, Walrus, Planet), Java first allocates a box for each instance variable of the class, and fills them with a default value. The constructor then usually (but not always) fills every box with some other value.

## Reference Variable Declaration
When we **declare** a variable of any reference type (Walrus, Dog, Planet, array, etc.), Java allocates a box of 64 bits, no matter what type of object.

As an example, suppose we call:
```java
Walrus someWalrus;
someWalrus = new Walrus(1000, 8.3);
```

The first line creates a box of 64 bits. The second line creates a new Walrus, and the address is returned by the `new` operator. These bits are then copied into the `someWalrus` box according to the GRoE.

## Parameter Passing
When you pass parameters to a function, you are also simply copying the bits. In other words, the GRoE also applies to parameter passing. Copying the bits is usually called "pass by value". In Java, we **always** pass by value.

## The Law of the Broken Futon (why we need to understand Java's internal mechanism IN ADVANCE)

This, I believe, is the ceiling so many students experience. It’s not some inherent limitation of their neurology. It’s something we create. We create it by saying, in word or in deed, “It’s okay that you don’t understand. Just follow these steps and check your answer in the back.” We create it by saying, “Only the clever ones will get it; for the rest, I just want to make sure they can do it.” We create it by saying, “Well, they don’t understand it now, but they’ll figure it out on their own eventually.”

A student who can answer questions without understanding them is a student with an expiration date.

# Q&A
- [Why string is a reference type?](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=907)
  - Java visualizer will represent string as a primary type by default. But it's reference type.
- [Why you cannot do `int[] a; \n a = {1, 2, 3, 4}`.](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=1046)
  - No idea.
- [`setVariable` method](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=1114)
  - Maybe this exists because there is an extra value check in the method.
  - Otherwise I don't see the meaning here. YAGNI (You ain't gonna need it.)
- [pass by reference example](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=1721)
  - cpp has `int &x` to pass by reference.
  - When you edit the `x` in another scope (like in a function call), it will change x in the environment where you call the function.
  - And you can use `*(x+1)` to get the variable you define after `x`. (pointer arithmetics)
- [opinion about recursion](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=1912)
  - Recursion in a linear data structure in Java is not good. (`this` pointer will take a lot space)
  - Dealing tree like shape data structure is where recursion really shine in Java.
  - Java doesn't have tail optimization.
- [Functional languages](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=2094)
  - Functional language would have no state in its objects, functions would have no side effects.
- [static function call](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=2337)
  - When you call a static method in main method, like in the `public class Filename`,
  - what you actually do is `Filename.function()`.
- [String in Java is immutable](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=2441)
  - When you manipulate a string, you got a new string.
- [Are functions with the same name but different parameters overloading](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=2482)
  - Yes.
- [Ternary Operator](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=2522)
  - `case.equals("uppercase") ? "JOHN" : "john";`
  - This is a language feature, so I will not teach much.
  - If you find it interesting, you can also us `streams`, `anonymouse class`.
- [Can we consider `main` as the global environment](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=2590)
  - Yes. But in the sub-environment you **cannot** access the parameters in the `main` environment.
  - This is not like in Python's environment diagram, if you find something is not in the current frame, you will find the thing in the parent frames.
  - If you want the global variable, you can make it a class variable.
  - But you still **cannot** invoke a class **instance** variable in a `static method`,
  - you need invoke it with the classname like:
```java
...
    public static void function(){
        Classname pq = new Classname();
        System.out.println(pq.Varible);
    }
```
- [a class variable is a short-hand instructor](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=2860)
  - You don't get it in the environment untill you create it.
- [how we can get a true global variable](https://youtu.be/20ZhW106838?t=2933)
  - `public static Type VariableName = <variable>`
  - Now you don't need instantiate the class anymore.
  - static variable is generally a bad practice in Java.