# Lecture
- [`.last` sometimes points at the sentinel is annoying](https://youtu.be/BspFdzVvYe8?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD5Gy1o06RRilCqv0So31lJt&t=101)
- [reflection is not a good style](https://youtu.be/WMfYfCfuwNs?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD5Gy1o06RRilCqv0So31lJt&t=164)

# Overview
**SLList Drawbacks**
- `addLast()` is slow.
- A naive solution: cache the `last` element.
- But `removeLast()` is slow.

**DLList** The solution is to give each `IntNode` a `prev` pointer, pointing to the previous item. This creates a doubly-linked list, or `DLList`. With this modification, adding and removing from the front and back of our list becomes fast (although adding/removing from the middle remains slow).

**Incorporating the Sentinel** Recall that we added a sentinel node to our `SLList`. For `DLList`, we can either have two sentinels (one for the front, and one for the back), or we can use a circular sentinel. A `DLList` using a circular sentinel has one sentinel. The sentinel points to the first element of the list with `next` and the last element of the list with `prev`. In addition, the last element of the list’s `next` points to the sentinel and the first element of the list’s `prev` points to the sentinel. For an empty list, the sentinel points to itself in both directions.

**Generic DLList** How can we modify our `DLList` so that it can be a list of whatever objects we choose? Recall that our class definition looks like this:
```java
public class DLList { ... }
```
We will change this to
```java
public class DLList<T> { ... }
```
where `T` is a placeholder object type. Notice the angle bracket syntax. Also note that we don’t have to use `T`; any variable name is fine. In our `DLList`, our item is now of type T, and our methods now take `T` instances as parameters. We can also rename our `IntNode` class to `TNode` for accuracy.

**Using Generic DLList** Recall that to create a DLList, we typed:
```java
DLList list = new DLList(10);
```
If we now want to create a DLList holding String objects, then we must say:
```java
DLList<String> list = new DLList<>("bone");
```
On list creation, the compiler replaces all instances of T with String! We will cover generic typing in more detail in later lectures.

**Arrays** Recall that variables are just boxes of bits. For example, `int x;` gives us a memory box of 32 bits. Arrays are a special object which consists of a numbered sequence of memory boxes!
- The length of an array cannot change.
- All the elements of the array must be of the same type. ((this is different from a Python list))
- Unlike regular classes, arrays do not have methods! 
- Arrays do have a length variable though.

**Instantiating Arrays** There are three valid notations for creating arrays. The first way specifies the size of the array, and fills the array with default values:
```java
int[] y = new int[3];
```
The second and third ways fill up the array with specific values.
```java
int[] x = new int[]{1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
int[] w = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
```

**Arraycopy** In order to make a copy of an array, we can use `System.arraycopy`. It takes 5 parameters; the syntax is hard to memorize, so we suggest using various references online such as [this](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/java/lang/system_arraycopy.htm).

**2D Arrays** We can declare multidimensional arrays. For 2D integer arrays, we use the syntax:
```java
int[][] array = new int[4][];
```
This creates an array that holds integer arrays. Note that we have to manually create the inner arrays like follows:
```java
array[0] = new int[]{0, 1, 2, 3};
```
Java can also create multidemensional arrays with the inner arrays created automatically. To do this, use the syntax:
```java
int[][] array = new int[4][4];
```
We can also use the notation:
```java
int[][] array = new int[][]{{1}, {1, 2}, {1, 2, 3}}
```
to get arrays with specific values.

**Arrays vs. Classes**
- Both are used to organize a bunch of memory.
- Both have a fixed number of “boxes”.
- Arrays are accessed via square bracket notation. Classes are accessed via dot notation.
- Elements in the array must be all be the same type. Elements in a class may be of different types.
- Array indices are computed at runtime. We cannot compute class member variable names.

# DLLists
## SecondToLast
Adding a `secondToLast` pointer will not help either, because then we'd need to find the third to last item in the list in order to make sure that `secondToLast` and `last` obey the appropriate invariants after removing the last item.

## Improvement #8: Sentinel Upgrade
Back pointers allow a list to support adding, getting, and removing the front and back of a list in constant time. There is a subtle issue with this design where the `last` pointer sometimes points at the sentinel node, and sometimes at a real node.

Both the two-sentinel and circular sentinel approaches work and result in code that is free of ugly special cases, though I personally find the circular approach to be cleaner and more aesthetically beautiful. (You get the last node throught `sentinel.prev` or `sentB.prev`)

## Generic DLLists
Since generics only work with reference types, we cannot put primitives like `int` or `double` inside of angle brackets, e.g. `<int>`. Instead, we use the reference version of the primitive type, which in the case of `int` case is `Integer`, e.g.
```java
DLList<Integer> d1 = new DLList<>(5);
d1.insertFront(10);
```

There are additional nuances about working with generic types, but we will defer them to a later chapter of this book, when you've had more of a chance to experiment with them on your own. For now, use the following rules of thumb:
- In the .java file **implementing** a data structure, specify your generic type name only once at the very top of the file after the class name.
- In other .java files, which use your data structure, specify the specific desired type during declaration, and use the empty diamond operator during instantiation.
- If you need to instantiate a generic over a primitive type, use `Integer`, `Double`, `Character`, `Boolean`, `Long`, `Short`, `Byte`, or `Float` instead of their primitive equivalents.

## Arrays vs. Classes
The key differences between memory boxes in arrays and classes:
- Array boxes are numbered and accessed using `[]` notation, and class boxes are named and accessed using dot notation.
- Array boxes must all be the same type. Class boxes can be different types.

One particularly notable impact of these difference is that [] notation allows us to specify which index we'd like at runtime. By contrast, specifying fields in a class is not something we do at runtime. (In python, dot notation will also only use the word literally. Thus, it acts like Java.)

This isn't a limitation you'll face often, but it's worth pointing out, just for the sake of good scholarship. For what it's worth, there is a way to specify desired fields at runtime called *reflection*, but it is considered very bad coding style for typical programs. You can read more about reflection [here](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/reflect/member/fieldValues.html). You should never use reflection in any 61B program, and we won't discuss it in our course.

In general, programming languages are partially designed to limit the choices of programmers to make code simpler to reason about. By restricting these sorts of features to the special Reflections API, we make typical Java programs easier to read and interpret.

## Appendix: Java Arrays vs. Other Languages
Compared to arrays in other languages, Java arrays:
- Have no special syntax for "slicing" (such as in Python).
- Cannot be shrunk or expanded (such as in Ruby).
- Do not have member methods (such as in Javascript).
- Must contain values only of the same type (unlike Python).

# Q&A
- [What should we put into sentinel's item in GList](https://youtu.be/IIZitaB3AVE?t=221)
  - We will cover in later lectures. The boring answer is `null`.
- [Is `int[] z = null;` useless?](https://youtu.be/IIZitaB3AVE?t=302)
  - Yes. 
  - But it actually initialize with null. `int[] x,y` creates nothing.
  - `System.out.println(z)` will compile  but x,y won't.
- [Are array types covariant?](https://youtu.be/IIZitaB3AVE?t=1986)
  - Yes.
- [Should we concern about rely too much on debugger?](https://youtu.be/IIZitaB3AVE?t=2289)
  - No. The habits you built will also serve you even in an environment what you can do is only print statement debugging.
- [Fast way to copy an object instance](https://youtu.be/IIZitaB3AVE?t=2574)
  - There once was Java Cloneable interface and it was broken.
- [Josh was so happy about incorporating JUnit into data structure class](https://youtu.be/IIZitaB3AVE?t=2805)
  - "Maybe you guys ever go to teach in princeton, I recommand you get their data structure class use JUnit."
- [What does test code coverage in Intellij do](https://youtu.be/IIZitaB3AVE?t=2841)
  - To test how much of code is exercised by your tests.
  - The tool will tell you the function you never call in your test code.
- [What does maven do](https://youtu.be/IIZitaB3AVE?t=2903)
  - It can auto-configure the meta of your project (java version).