# Lecture
- [Loitering](https://youtu.be/Qcrd80To-TM?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4S8NCRyN3yQV2U2TpjWUhy&t=217)

# Overview
**Lists vs. Arrays** Our `DLList` has a drawback. Getting the i’th item is slow; we have to scan through each item in the list, starting from the beginning or the end, until we reach the i’th item. For an array named `A`, however, we can quickly access the i’th item using bracket notation, `A[i]`. Thus, our goal is to implement a list with an array.

**AList** The `AList` will have the same API as our `DLList`, meaning it will have the same methods as `DLList` (`addLast()`, `getLast()`, `removeLast()`, and `get(int i)`). The `AList` will also have a `size` variable that tracks its size.

**AList Invariants** There are a few invariants for our `AList`.
- `addLast`: The next item we want to add, will go into position `size`.
- `getLast`: The item we want to return is in position `size - 1`. (offset)
- `size`: The number of items in the list should be `size`.

**Implementing AList** Each AList has an `int[]` called items.

- For `addLast`, we place our item in `items[size]`.
- For `getLast`, we simply return `items[size - 1]`.
- For `removeLast`, we simply decrement `size` (we don’t need to change items). Thus, if addLast is called next, it simply overwrites the old value, because size was decremented. 
  - However, **it is good practice to null out objects** when they are removed, as this will save memory. Notice how closely these methods were related to the invariants.

**Array Resizing** When the array gets too full, we can resize the array. However, we have learned that array size cannot change. The solution is, instead, to create a new array of a larger size, then copy our old array values to the new array. Now, we have all of our old values, but we have more space to add items.

**Improving Resize** Performance Instead of adding by an extra box, we can instead create a new array with `size * FACTOR` items, where `FACTOR` could be any number, like 2 for example. We will discuss why this is fast later in the course. (This is how Python works)

**Downsizing Array Size** What happens if we have a 1 million length array, but we remove 990,000 elements of the array? Well, similarly, we can downsize our array by creating an array of half the size, if we reach 250,000 elements, for example. Again, we will discuss this more rigorously later in the course.

**Aside: Breaking Code Up** Sometimes, we write large methods that do multiple things. A better way is to break our large methods up into many smaller methods. One advantage of this is that we can test our code in parts.

**Generic AList** Last time, we discussed how to make a generic `DLList`. We can do something similar for `AList`. But we find that we error out on array creation. Our problem is that generic arrays are not allowed in Java. Instead, we will change the line:
```java
items = new Item[100];
```
to:
```java
items = (Item[]) new Object[100];
```
This is called a *cast*, and we will learn about it in the future.

# The AList
## Memory Performance
Our `AList` is almost done, but we have one major issue. Suppose we insert 1,000,000,000 items, then later remove 990,000,000 items. In this case, we'll be using only 10,000,000 of our memory boxes, leaving 99% completely unused.

To fix this issue, we can also downsize our array when it starts looking empty. Specifically, we define a "usage ratio" R which is equal to the size of the list divided by the length of the items array.

In a typical implementation, we halve the size of the array when R falls to less than 0.25.

## Generic ALists
The other change we make is that we null out any items that we "delete". Whereas before, we had no reason to zero out elements that were deleted, with generic objects, we do want to null out references to the objects that we're storing. This is to avoid "loitering". Recall that Java only destroys objects when the last reference has been lost. If we fail to null out the reference, then Java will not garbage collect the objects that have been added to the list.

# Exercises

- We did not touch upon the method `addFirst` for an `AList`. Think of some of the problems you would experience in writing an `addFirst` method, and think of some potential solutions. If you think you’ve got a good one, write it out.

This is actually a proj1 intro question. The real question here is: implement an O(1) `addFirst` method.

# Q&A
- [`//` vs `/* comments */`](https://youtu.be/bN_nbaZIPfU?t=374)
  - `//` is used at the end of a line.
  - `/* */` can be separate into multiple lines.
- [resize is really hard](https://youtu.be/bN_nbaZIPfU?t=756)
- [Why `nextFirst` and `nextLast` are different at initializing](https://youtu.be/bN_nbaZIPfU?t=1080)
  - You don't have to do that way. 
  - If you want to make them the same, I think it will work.
- [Why creating a generic array in Java is not allowed](https://youtu.be/bN_nbaZIPfU?t=1475)
  - Java compiler needs to be back-compatible. (sb. complied a file in Java4, the file should also be compiled in Java5)
  - At the time of introducing, they couldn't make generic a real feature of the language.
  - When a `.java` compiles to a `.class` file, all that information about types is lost. (type erasure)
  - This is somewhat controverial to how the Java generic system works.
  - `AList<Interger> a = new Alist<>();` is an array of 64 bit references that point at objects with 32 bit `int` instance variables.
  - This makes generic types less efficient than hard codes types.
  - There is a HUGE project underway called Project Valhalla to remedy this issue. They've been working it for 5+ years. Maybe more.
  - Take cs164 if you are interested in it.
- [`LinkedListDeque` vs `ArrayListDeque`](https://youtu.be/bN_nbaZIPfU?t=2077)
  - `ALD` has constant random item access.
  - In real world, a deque shouldn't have get method.
  - `LLD` are more memory efficient (no extra array entries) but heavier (`prev`, `next` pointers). It's hard to say you can get a memory saving with it.
  - `LLD` you don't have to worry about resize. Code is simpler.
  - If the size of a deque is really huge, `ALD` can occasionally have lag. (resize)
  - People tend to use `ALD` by default because it's generally better.
- [Josh's teaching experience](https://youtu.be/bN_nbaZIPfU?t=2773)

# Lab3: Timing Tests and Randomized Comparison Tests
- Timing (profiling)
- Comparison Test
- Randomized Function Calls
- Conditional Breakpoints

## Notes

### Use well-designed unit tests
Randomized tests should not be used as a replacement for well-designed unit tests! I personally generally lean towards non-random tests where possible, and think of randomized tests as a supplemental testing approach. See t[his thread](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=24349522) for a debate on this issue.

### Make sure you filled the condition
If you use the debug feature without specifying a condition, your code will stop in some various mysterious places. Make sure you never have “Any Exception” checked without having a specified condition.

# Project 1
- ArrayDeque is implemented by a circular array data structure.
  - position after increase / clockwise by 1: `(pos + 1) % array.length`
  - ... decrease / anticlockwise by 1: `(pos + array.length - 1) % array.length`