# Lecture
- WordNet

- [DMS as a Two Step process](https://youtu.be/OMaWI41pcxo?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD7Ycy9QeJSPXVoTwAH52Rlw&t=155)
  - At compile time: We determine the **signature S** of the method to be called.
    - S is decided using **ONLY static types**.
    - The static type of `a` is an Animal, `d` is a Dog.
    - `a.praise(d)` at compile time will only look at `interface Animal`.
    - `d.praise(d)` will only look at `Dog class` and `void praise(Dog a)` is invoked instead of `default void praise(Animal a)` because its signature. (If you forgot why there is a `default` here, just go to watch the whole lecture.)
  - At runtime: The dynamic type of the **invoking object** uses its method with this exact signature S.
    - By “invoking object”, we mean the object whose method is invoked.
    - `a.sniff(d)`, the dynamic type of `a` is a dog, is invoked by a Dog instance,
    - Override happens, the method under `Dog class` is used.
    - If only `Dog` class has the `sniff` method, this code won't compile because again "S is decided using **ONLY static types**."

- `java.util.List<Integer> L = new java.util.ArrayList<>();`
- [immortal!!!](https://youtu.be/9KuVnIje2Ys?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD7Ycy9QeJSPXVoTwAH52Rlw&t=29)
- In both cases (Interface Inheritance and Implementation Inheritance), we specify “is-a” relationships, not “has-a”.
  - Good: Dog implements Animal, SLList implements List61B.
  - Bad: Cat implements Claw, Set implements SLList.

# Overview
**Method Overloading** In Java, methods in a class can have the same name, but different parameters. For example, a `Math` class can have an `add(int a, int b)` method and an `add(float a, float b)` method as well. The Java compiler is smart enough to choose the correct method depending on the parameters that you pass in. Methods with the same name but different parameters are said to be overloaded.

**Interfaces** We will use the keyword interface instead of class to create our List. More explicitly, we write:
```java
public interface List<Item> { ... }
```
The key idea is that interfaces specify what this List can do, not how to do it. Since all lists have a get method, we add the following method signature to the interface class:
```java
public Item get(int i);
```
Notice we did not define this method. We simply stated that this method should exist as long as we are working with a List interface.

Now, we want to specify that an `AList` is a `List`. We will change our class declaration of `AList` to:
```java
public AList<Item> implements List<Item> { ... }
```
We can do the same for `SLList`. Now, going back to our `largestNumber` method, instead of creating one method for each type of list, we can simply create one method that takes in a List. As long as our actual object implements the `List` interface, then this method will work properly!

**Overriding** For each method in `AList` that we also defined in `List`, we will add an `@Override` right above the method signature. As an example:
```java
@Override
public Item get(int i) { ... }
```
This is not technically necessary, but is good style and thus we will require it. Also, it allows us to check against typos. If we mistype our method name, the compiler will prevent our compilation if we have the `@Override` tag.

**Interface Inheritance** Formally, we say that subclasses inherit from the superclass. Interfaces contain all the method signatures, and each subclass must implement every single signature; think of it as a contract. In addition, relationships can span multiple generations. For example, C can inherit from B, which can inherit from A.

**Default Methods** Interfaces can have default methods. We define this via:
```java
default public void method() { ... }
```
We can actually implement these methods inside the interface. Note that there are no instance variables to use, but we can freely use the methods that are defined in the interface, without worrying about the implementation. Default methods should work for any type of object that implements the interface! The subclasses do not have to re-implement the default method anywhere; they can simply call it for free. However, we can still override default methods, and re-define the method in our subclass.

**Static vs. Dynamic Type** Every variable in Java has a static type. This is the type specified when the variable is declared, and is checked at compile time. Every variable also has a dynamic type; this type is specified when the variable is instantiated, and is checked at runtime. As an example:
```java
Thing a;
a = new Fox();
```
Here, Thing is the static type, and Fox is the dynamic type. This is fine because all foxes are things. We can also do:
```java
Animal b = (Animal) a;
```
This is fine, because all foxes are animals too. We can do:
```java
Fox c = (Fox) b;
```
This is fine, because b points to a Fox. Finally, we can do:
```java
a = new Squid();
```
This is fine, because the static type of a is a Thing, and Squid is a thing.

**Dynamic Method Selection** The rule is, if we have a static type `X`, and a dynamic type `Y`, then if `Y` overrides the method from `X`, then on runtime, we use the method in Y instead. Student often confuse overloading and overriding.

**Overloading and Dynamic Method Selection** Dynamic method selection plays no role when it comes to overloaded methods. Consider the following piece of code, where Fox extends Animal.
```java
1  Fox f = new Fox();
2  Animal a = f;
3  define(f);
4  define(a);
```
Let’s assume we have the following overloaded methods in the same class:
```java
public static void define(Fox f) { ... }
public static void define(Animal a) { ... }
```
Line 3 will execute define(Fox f), while line 4 will execute define(Animal a). Dynamic method selection only applies when we have overridden methods. There is no overriding here, and therefore dynamic method selection does not apply.

# [Exercise](https://hkn.eecs.berkeley.edu/examfiles/cs61b_sp17_mt1.pdf#page=5)
a) 
F1 F2;
F1;
F1 F2 F3; `bird` as a parameter is always a `Bird` not `Falcon`.

b) 
F1 F2 F3 F4; 
F1; You got the scope from a instance, so only dynamic type matters. 
F1 F2 F3; If you missed F3, shout out loudly "overloaded! overloaded! overloaded so it did get called".
F1 F3;
F1 F2 F3 F4;

Conclusion:
1. We define a set of methods to be called, which have the same name, in compile time with and only with Static Types of their parameters.
2. For subclasses, it will inherit all the methods from its superclass and override those methods with *identical signatures*.
3. Overload will happen when parameters are not identical. Even they are in a is-a relationship.
4. For a) `Falcon:gulgate(Bird)`, the set of methods will be F1 and F3, but because `bird`'s dynamic type is `Falcon`, overload happened, thus F3 would be called.
5. If the set of methods is empty, the code won't compile.
6. Use demo code if you have trouble recurring to it.

# Intro and interfaces
## The Problem
It's nice that Java is smart enough to know how to deal with two of the same methods for different types, but overloading has several downsides:

- It's super repetitive and ugly, because you now have two virtually identical blocks of code.
- It's more code to maintain, meaning if you want to make a small change to the longest method such as correcting a bug, you need to change it in the method for each type of list.
- If we want to make more list types, we would have to copy the method for every new list class.

## Hypernyms, Hyponyms, and Interface Inheritance
Dog is what is called a *hypernym* of poodle, malamute, husky, etc. In the reverse direction, poodle, malamute, and husky, are *hyponyms* of dog.

In Java, in order to express this hierarchy, we need to do two things:
- Step 1: Define a type for the general list hypernym -- we will choose the name List61B. `public interface List61B<Item> {...}`
- Step 2: Specify that SLList and AList are hyponyms of that type. `public class AList<Item> implements List61B<Item>{...}`

`implements List61B<Item>` is essentially a promise. AList is saying "I promise I will have and define all the attributes and behaviors specified in the List61B interface"

## Dynamic Type
Aside: the name “dynamic type” is actually quite semantic in its origin! Should lst be reassigned to point to an object of another type, say a AList object, lst’s dynamic type would now be AList and not SLList! It’s dynamic because it changes based on the type of the object it’s currently referring to.

When Java runs a method that is overriden, it searches for the appropriate method signature in it's **dynamic type** and runs it.

## Overload Caveat
Say there are two methods in the same class
```java
public static void peek(List61B<String> list) {
    System.out.println(list.getLast());
}
public static void peek(SLList<String> list) {
    System.out.println(list.getFirst());
}
```
and you run this code
```java
SLList<String> SP = new SLList<String>();
List61B<String> LP = SP;
SP.addLast("elk");
SP.addLast("are");
SP.addLast("cool");
peek(SP);
peek(LP);
```
The first call to `peek()` will use the second peek method that takes in an `SLList`. The second call to `peek()` will use the first peek method which takes in a `List61B`. This is because the only distinction between two overloaded methods is the types of the parameters. When Java checks to see which method to call, it checks the **static type** and calls the method with the parameter of the same type.

## Implementation Inheritance Drawbacks
- We are fallible humans, and we can't keep track of everything, so it's possible that you overrode a method but forgot you did.
- It may be hard to resolve conflicts in case two interfaces give conflicting default methods.
- It encourages overly complex code

# Q&A
- [Casting](https://youtu.be/GGzoibmx9uY?t=995)
  - `Bird bird = (Bird) new Falcon();` `bird` will still a falcon,
    - because we create it with `Falcon()`.
    - `bird` is a instance variable, you cast it as a bird won't make the instance varible go away.
    - This doesn't change any type. It makes the compiler think its a `Bird`.
  - `Falcon falcon = bird;` will fail because not all birds are falcons.
  - The declaration is for static types and the instantiation is for dynamic type.
  - Casting is to tell the **compiler**:"don't do your normal type checking, I know what I am doing."
  - Casting doesn't change anything.
- [Be lazy, don't think too much, because thinking means you gonna make mistakes](https://youtu.be/GGzoibmx9uY?t=1467)
  - why you should be smart when you could be lazy?
  - Here *destructively* and *non-destructively*, 
  - I guess there is a way you can kind of practice that way of thinking, but
  - I don't think they are so fundamentally different.