# Lecture
- Subclasses cannot access private memebers of their superclass.
- [Interface doesn't extend `Object` class.](https://youtu.be/wrx_y3ib5iQ?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD6Mi8gDriGGeSnHi68QLuVD&t=118)
- [Managing complexity](https://youtu.be/GioVGLuW69o?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD6Mi8gDriGGeSnHi68QLuVD&t=76)
- [Implementation inheritance breaks Encapsulation](https://youtu.be/EfxYiAN6YME?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD6Mi8gDriGGeSnHi68QLuVD&t=8)

# Overview
**The Interface and implements** Lets first note some differences between inheritence of a parent class and interfaces (Note that a class can do both, even at the same time! Here is the syntax for implemeting an interface:
```java
SLList<Blorp> implements List61B<Blorp>
```
Similarly, the way for a class to extend the qualities of another class the syntax is as follows:
```java
Class_Name extends Class_Name
```

**What is Inherited?** We have a powerful tool in Inheritance now; however, we will define a few rules. For now, we will say that we can inherit:
- instance and static variables
- all methods
- all nested classes 

This changes a little bit with the introduction of private variables but don’t worry about that right now. The one item that is not inherited is a class’s constructor.

**The Special Case of the Constructor?** Even though constructor’s are not inherited, we still use them. We can call the constructor explicitly by using the keyword super(). At the start of every constructor, there is already an implicit call to its super class`s constructor. As a result
```java
public VengefulSLList() {
  deletedItems = new SLList<Item>();
}
```
is equivalent to
```java
public VengefulSLList() {
  super();
  deletedItems = new SLList<Item>();
}
```
However, constructor`s with arguments are not implicitly called. This means that.
```java
public VengefulSLList() {
    super(x);
    deletedItems = new SLList<Item>();
  }
```
is not equivalent to
```java
public VengefulSLList() {
    deletedItems = new SLList<Item>();
  }
```
This is because only the empty argument super() is called.

**Is A.** When a class inherits from another, we know that it must have all the qualities of it. This means that `VengefulSLList` is a `SLList` because it has all the qualities of an `SLList`- it just has a few additional ones too.

Every single class is a descendent on the Object class, meaning they are all Objects.

**Casting** This statement would be valid
```java
Dog largerDog = maxDog(frank, frankJr);
```
But this one would not be
```java
Poodle largerPoodle = maxDog(frank, frankJr);
```
Instead of being happy with just having a generic `Dog`, we can be a bit risky and use a technique called casting. Casting allows us to force the static type of a variable, *basically tricking the compiler into letting us force the static type of an expression.* To make `largerPoodle` into a static type Poodle we will use the following:
```java
Poodle largerPoodle = (Poodle) maxDog(frank, frankJr);
```

**Casting**, while powerful is also quite dangerous. You need to ensure that what you are casting to can and will actually happen. There are a few rules that can be used:

- You can always cast up (to a more generic version of a class) without fear of ruining anything because we know the more specific version is a version of the generic class. For example you can always cast a Poodle to a Dog because all Poodles are Dog’s.

- You can also cast down (to a more specific version of a class) with caution as you need to make sure that, during runtime, nothing is passed in that violates your cast. For example, sometimes Dog’s are Poodle’s but not always.

- Finally, you cannot ever cast to a class that is **neither above or below** the class being cast. For an example, you cannot cast a `Dog` to a `Monkey` because a `Monkey` is not in the direct lineage of a `Dog` -- it is a child of `Animal` so a bit more distant. You can think of this as “side casting” and it will result in a compile time error since the compiler knows this cast cannot possibly work.

**Inheritance Cheatsheet** 
`VengefulSLList` extends `SLList` means `VengefulSLList` "is-an" `SLList`, and inherits all of `SLList`'s members:
- Variables, methods nested classes
- **Not constructors** Subclass constructors must invoke superclass constructor first. 
- The super keyword can be used to invoke overridden superclass methods and constructors.
Invocation of overridden methods follows two simple rules:
- Compiler plays it safe and only allows us to do things according to the static type.
- For overridden methods (not overloaded methods), the actual method invoked is based on the dynamic type of the invoking expression
- Can use casting to overrule compiler type checking.

# Exercise
## 1
### Q
Say there is a class Poodle that inherits from Dog. The Dog class looks like this
```java
 public class Dog{
     int weight;
     public Dog(int weight_in_pounds) {
       weight = weight_in_pounds;
     }
   }
```
And the Poodle class looks like this.
```java
 public class Poodle extends Dog{
   public Poodle() {}
 }
```
Is this valid? If so explain why Poodle is a Dog if Dog has no constructor with no argument. If it is not valid then explain how we can make it valid.
### A
This is not valid. Because there is no default constructor for the Dog class. And it won't compile. But you can do this:
```java
 public class Poodle extends Dog{
   public Poodle(int weight_in_pounds) {super(weight_in_pounds);}
 }
```

## 2
### Q
The `Monkey` class is a subclass of the `Animal` class and the `Dog` class is a subclass of the `Animal` class. However a Dog is not a Monkey nor is a Monkey a Dog. What will happen for the following code? Assume that the constructors are all formatted properly.
```java
 Monkey jimmy = new Monkey("Jimmy");
 Dog limmy = (Dog) jimmy;
```
### A
The compiler is smart enough to detect you did a impossible casting. And it's stupid enough to not let you compile even the `Monkey` and `Dog` have identical codes.

## 3
### Q
How about for this code?
```java
 Monkey orangutan = new Monkey("fruitful");
 Dog mangotan = (Dog)(Animal) orangutan;
```
Provide brief explanation as to why you believe your answers to be correct.
### A
You are smart enought to trick the IntelliJ, but once you compile it will throw you an Exception.

# Extends, Casting, Higher Order Functions
## Extends
We can set up this inheritance relationship in the class header, using the extends keyword like so:
```java
public class RotatingSLList<Item> extends SLList<Item>
```
Note that constructors are not inherited, and private members cannot be directly accessed by subclasses.

## Reuse code with `super`
```java
public class VengefulSLList<Item> extends SLList<Item> {
    SLList<Item> deletedItems;

    public void printLostItems() {
        deletedItems.print();
    }
}
```
VengefulSLList's `removeLast` should do exactly the same thing that `SLList`'s does, except with one additional operation - adding the removed item to the `deletedItems` list. In an effort to reuse code, we can override the `removeLast` method to modify it to fit our needs, and call the removeLast method defined in the parent class, SLList, using the super keyword.
```java
    @Override
    public Item removeLast() {
        Item x = super.removeLast();
        deletedItems.addLast(x);
        return x;
    }
```

## Constructors Are Not Inherited
While constructors are not inherited, Java requires that **all constructors must start with a call to one of its superclass's constructors.**

To gain some intuition on why that it is, recall that the extends keywords defines an "is-a" relationship between a subclass and a parent class. If a VengefulSLList "is-an" SLList, then it follows that every VengefulSLList must be set up like an SLList.

Here's a more in-depth explanation. Let's say we have two classes:
```java
public class Human {...}
public class TA extends Human {...}
```
It is logical for TA to extend Human, because all TA's are Human. Thus, we want TA's to inherit the attributes and behaviors of Humans.

If we run the code below:
```java
TA Christine = new TA();
```
Then first, a Human must be created. Then, that Human can be given the qualities of a TA. It doesn't make sense for a TA to be constructed without first creating a Human first.

Thus, we can either explicitly make a call to the superclass's constructor, using the super keyword:
```java
public VengefulSLList() {
    super();
    deletedItems = new SLList<Item>();
}
```
Or, if we choose not to, Java will automatically make a call to the s**uperclass's no-argument constructor** for us.

In this case, adding super() has no difference from the constructor we wrote before. It just makes explicit what was done implicitly by Java before.

## The Object Class
Every class in Java is a descendant of the Object class, or `extends` the Object class. Even classes that do not have an explicit `extends` in their class still *implicitly* extend the Object class.

For example,
- VengefulSLList extends SLList explicitly in its class declaration
- SLList extends Object implicitly

This means that since SLList inherits all members of Object, VengefulSLList inherits all members of SLList and Object, transitively. So, what is to be inherited from Object?

As seen in [the documentation for the Object class](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/Object.html), the Object class provides operations that every Object should be able to do - like `.equals(Object obj)`, `.hashCode()`, and `toString()`.

## Encapsulation
Encapsulation is one of the fundamental principles of object oriented programming, and is one of the approaches that we take as programmers to resist our biggest enemy: *complexity*. Managing complexity is one of the major challenges we must face when writing large programs.

Some of the tools we can use to fight complexity include hierarchical abstraction (abstraction barriers!) and a concept known as "Design for change". This revolves around the idea that programs should be built into modular, interchangeable pieces that can be swapped around without breaking the system. Additionally, **hiding information** that others don't need is another fundamental approach when managing a large system.

In computer science terms, a module can be defined as a set of methods that work together as a whole to perform a task or set of related tasks. This could be something like a class that represents a list. Now, if the implementation details of a module are kept internally hidden and the only way to interact with it is through a documented interface, then that module is said to be encapsulated.

## Casting
```java
Poodle largerPoodle = (Poodle) maxDog(frank, frankSr); // runtime exception!
```
Casting allows this code to pass, and when `maxDog` returns the `Malamute` at runtime, and we try casting a `Malamute` as a `Poodle`, we run into a runtime exception - a `ClassCastException`.

## Higher Order Functions
In old school Java (Java 7 and earlier), memory boxes (variables) could not contain pointers to functions. What that means is that we could not write a function that has a "Function" type, as there was simply no type for functions.

To get around this we can take advantage of interface inheritance. Let's write an interface that defines any function that takes in an integer and returns an integer - an `IntUnaryFunction`.
```java
public interface IntUnaryFunction {
    int apply(int x);
}
```
Now we can write a class which `implements IntUnaryFunction` to represent a concrete function. Let's make a function that takes in an integer and returns 10 times that integer.
```java
public class TenX implements IntUnaryFunction {
    /* Returns ten times the argument. */
    public int apply(int x) {
        return 10 * x;
    }
}
```
At this point, we've written in Java the Python equivalent of the tenX function. Let's write `do_twice` now.
```java
public static int do_twice(IntUnaryFunction f, int x) {
    return f.apply(f.apply(x));
}
```
A call to `print(do_twice(tenX, 2))` in Java would look like this:
```java
System.out.println(do_twice(new TenX(), 2));
```

# Q&A
- [Why you use `i += 1`](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=178)
  - Because I want to discourage ppl use `x[i++]`.
- [Call two functions in a line](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=331)
  - `f(3), g(3);`
  - You do this not `f(3) && g(3)` because maybe the return type of `f` is `void`.
- [What is a has-a relationship](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=465)
  - A FebruarySet has-a SLList to store its data.
  - If you implemente this by Extends inheritance, you are using it in a not recommended way.
  - Because has-a relationship can be easily done by make it a class meber.
  - "has-a" means composition.
- [It is possible that API is not sufficient to do the job](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=921)
- [What's the different between `extends` and `implements`](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=945)
  - If the thing afterward is a class, you use `extends`, otherwise (interface) `implements`.
  - `implements` takes a thing that is abstract to concret.
- [The advantages of signaitures in interface](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=1030)
  - You let the compiler know whether a variable has the thing you need.
  - Concisely and formally specify the behavior of the class.
- [Runtime type checker](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=1320)
  - You have two identical classes: FridayCat and ThursdayCat.
  - They are the same only differ in name.
  - `FridayCat c = (FridayCat) new ThursdayCat();` will still crash.
  - `int c = (int) new Double(3.3);` is allowed because of special rules for primitives.
- [The keyword for `package private` is no keyword](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=1784)
  - If you forget put `public`/`private`, you are actually doing this.
- [abstract in java](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=1831)
  - It's a keyword in between an interface and a class.
  - `abstract` class can have instance variables.
  - I once had `abstract` in the class, but they introduced the `default`. I didn't need it anymore.
- [A case for `abstract`](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=1875)
  - Say you want to write your own `List` class.
  - You use `MyClass implements java.util.List`.
  - You need provide all of methods `java.util.List` provides. It will take a long time.
  - So you can use the Abstract List,
  - You only need to implement `get` method and have all the features (of Abstract List).
  - Maybe it's legacy reason they don't have default methods for `java.util.List`.
- [You cannot instantiate interface](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=2782)
- [Josh won't tell you how to do dynamic type tricks (get the dynamic type of the instance which calls the method)](https://youtu.be/GzrokKOAxjw?t=3123)