# Lecture
- [Java will implicitly call `.toString()`](https://youtu.be/AKnMv0ootkg?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4vPE_Bd8QagarKi3kPw8rB&t=305)
- [StringBuilder](https://youtu.be/AKnMv0ootkg?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4vPE_Bd8QagarKi3kPw8rB&t=465)
```java
@Override
public String toString() {
	StringBuilder returnSB = new StringBuilder("{");
	for (int i = 0; i < size - 1; ++i) {
		returnSB.append(items[i].toString());
		returnSB.append(", ");
	}
	returnSB.append(items[size - 1]);
	returnSB.append("}");
	return returnSB.toString();
}
```
- [Again `==` and `.equal`](https://youtu.be/qHuS1o97nfQ?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4vPE_Bd8QagarKi3kPw8rB&t=40)
- [Classic taking overload as override mistake](https://youtu.be/qHuS1o97nfQ?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4vPE_Bd8QagarKi3kPw8rB&t=197)
- [Better `.toString()`](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tjLpeVD0KWc&list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4vPE_Bd8QagarKi3kPw8rB&index=8)
  - This is slower than StringBuilder.
  - But you won't call it that much, so I will sacrifice a little efficiency.
```java
@Override
public String toString(){
	List<String> listOfItems = new ArrayList<>();
	for (T x : this) {
		listOfItems.add(x.toString());
	}
	return "{" + String.join(", ", listOfItems) + "}";
}
```
- [`.of` method](https://youtu.be/tjLpeVD0KWc?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4vPE_Bd8QagarKi3kPw8rB&t=189)
  - Varargs: Variable (numble of) Arguments.
  - The first `<Glerp>` declares it's a generic method.
  - The second specify that it will return a `ArraySet<Glerp>`
  - The `Glerp... stuff` is how varargs declare.
```java
public static <Glerp> ArraySet<Glerp> of(Glerp... stuff) {
	ArraySet<Glerp> returnSet = new ArraySet<Glerp>();
	for (Glerp x : stuff) {
		returnSet.add(x);
	}
	return returnSet;
```

# Overview
## Exceptions
Most likely you have encountered an exception in your code such as a `NullPointerException` or an `IndexOutOfBoundsException`. Now we will learn about how we can “throw” exceptions ourselves, and also handle thrown exceptions. Here is an example of an exception that we throw:
```java
throw new RuntimeException("For no reason.");
```
> Note: Try/Catch is out of scope for now!

Throwing exceptions is useful to notify your user of something wrong they have done. On the other hand, we can also “catch” exceptions that happen in our code! Here is an example:
```java
try {
    dog.run()
} catch (Exception e) {
    System.out.println("Tried to run: " + e);
}
System.out.println("Hello World!");
```
There are a few key things to note. Firstly, the entirety of the try section is run until/if there is an exception thrown. If there never is an exception, the entire catch block is skipped. If there is an exception, the code immediately jumps into the catch block with the corresponding exception, and executes from there.

## Iterators and Iterables
These two words are very closely related, but have two different meanings that are often easy to confuse. The first thing to know is that these are both Java interfaces, with different methods that need to be implemented. Here is a simplified interface for Iterator:
```java
public interface Iterator<T> {
  boolean hasNext();
  T next();
}
```
Here is a simplified interface for Iterable:
```java
public interface Iterable<T> {
    Iterator<T> iterator();
}
```
Notice that in order for an object (for example an ArrayList or LinkedList) to be *iterable*, it must include a method that returns an iterator. The iterator is the object that iterates over an iterable object. Keep this relationship and distinction in mind as you work with these two interfaces.

## == vs .equals
We have two concepts of equality in Java -- “`==`” and the “`.equals()`” method. The key difference is that when using `==`, we are checking if two objects have the same **address in memory** (that they point to the same object). On the other hand, `.equals()` is a method that can be overridden by a class and can be used to define some custom way of determining equality.

For example, say we wanted to check if two stones are equal:
```java
public class Stone{
  public Stone(int weight){...}
}
Stone s = new Stone(100);
Stone r = new Stone(100);
```
If we want to consider `s` and `r` equal because they have the same weight. If we do check equality using `==`, these Stones would not be considered equal because they do not have the same memory address.

On the other hand, if you override the equals method of Stone as follows
```java
public boolean equals(Object o){
  return this.weight == ((Stone) o).weight
}
```
We would have that the stones would be considered equal because they have the same weight.

# Q&A
- [Different set implementations are the one of the most important part of CS61B](https://youtu.be/7bKEipkOj_4?t=184)
- [Java assumes that a number which starts at 0 is based on 8](https://youtu.be/7bKEipkOj_4?t=716)
- [My solution for proj1 uses `instanceof` but I forgot to put it on specs](https://youtu.be/7bKEipkOj_4?t=1347)
  - `getting T, expected type T`
  - make sure your inner class looks like:
  - `private class DequeIterator implements Iterator<T>{`
  - not:
  - `private class DequeIterator<T> implements Iterator<T>{`
- [Java's python dictionary equivalent is `Map`](https://youtu.be/7bKEipkOj_4?t=1504)
  - HashMaps have the feature that they fail spectacularly if the "key" overrides equals but not hascode.
- [You still need to instantiate static class](https://youtu.be/7bKEipkOj_4?t=2116)
  - The only difference is that you don't have `this` in a static class.
  - Static classes take less memory because they don't need to have a pointer back to their inclosing instances.
- [`this.getClass().getConstructor.instanceOf()`](https://youtu.be/7bKEipkOj_4?t=2814)
- [LOL. This should be on an episode of some Netflix shows.](https://youtu.be/7bKEipkOj_4?t=3100)

# Exceptions, Iterators, Object Methods
## Iteration
The List interface extends the Iterable interface, inheriting the abstract iterator() method. (Actually, List extends Collection which extends Iterable, but it's easier to codethink of this way to start.)
```java
public interface Iterable<T> {
    Iterator<T> iterator();
}
```
```java
public interface List<T> extends Iterable<T>{
    ...
}
```
Next, the compiler checks that Iterators have `hasNext()` and `next()`. The Iterator interface specifies these abstract methods explicitly:
```java
public interface Iterator<T> {
    boolean hasNext();
    T next();
}
```

What if someone calls `next` when `hasNext` returns false?

> This behavior is undefined. However, a common convention is to throw a `NoSuchElementException`. See [Discussion 5](https://sp19.datastructur.es/materials/discussion/disc05sol.pdf) for examples.

Will `hasNext` always be called before next?

> Not necessarily. This is sometimes the case when someone using the iterator knows exactly how many elements are in the sequence. Thus, we can't rely on the user calling `hasNext` before `next`. However, you can always call `hasNext` from within your `next` function.

Specific classes will implement their own iteration behaviors for the interface methods. Let's look at an example. We are going to add iteration through keys to our ArrayMap class. First, we write a new class called ArraySetIterator, nested inside of ArraySet:
```java
private class ArraySetIterator implements Iterator<T> {
    private int wizPos;

    public ArraySetIterator() {
        wizPos = 0;
    }

    public boolean hasNext() {
        return wizPos < size;
    }

    public T next() {
        T returnItem = items[wizPos];
        wizPos += 1;
        return returnItem;
    }
}
```
We still want to be able to support the enhanced for loop, though, to make our calls cleaner. So, we need to make ArrayMap implement the Iterable interface. The essential method of the Iterable interface is `iterator()`, which returns an Iterator object for that class. All we have to do is return an instance of our `ArraySetIterator` that we just wrote!
```java
public Iterator<T> iterator() {
    return new ArraySetIterator();
}
```
```java
Iterator<Integer> iter = aset.iterator();
while(iter.hasNext()) {
    System.out.println(iter.next());
}
/* ===== */
for (int i : aset) {
    System.out.println(i);
}
```
Here we've seen **Iterable**, the interface that makes a class able to be iterated on, and requires the method `iterator()`, which returns an Iterator object. And we've seen **Iterator**, the interface that defines the object with methods to actually do that iteration. You can think of an Iterator as a machine that you put onto an iterable that facilitates the iteration. Any iterable is the object on which the iterator is performing.

## Object Methods
### `toString()`
The `toString()` method provides a string representation of an object. The `System.out.println()` function implicitly calls this method on whatever object is passed to it and prints the string returned. When you run `System.out.println(dog)`, it's actually doing this:
```java
String s = dog.toString()
System.out.println(s)
```
The default Object class' `toString()` method prints the location of the object in memory. This is a hexidecimal string. Classes like Arraylist and java arrays have their own overridden versions of the `toString()` method. This is why, when you were working with and writing tests for Arraylist, errors would always return the list in a nice format like this (1, 2, 3, 4) instead of returning the memory location.
```java
public String toString() {
    String returnString = "{";
    for (int i = 0; i < size; i += 1) {
        returnString += keys[i];
        returnString += ", ";
    }
    returnString += "}";
    return returnString;
}
```
This solution, although seemingly simple and elegant, is actually very naive. This is because when you use string concatenation in Java like so: `returnString += keys[i];` **you are actually not just appending to `returnString`, you are creating an entirely new string.** This is incredibly inefficient because creating a new string object takes time too! Specifically, linear in the length of the string.

## `equals()`
`equals()` and `==` have different behaviors in Java. `==` Checks if two objects are actually the same object in memory. Remember, pass-by-value! `==` checks if two boxes hold the same thing. For primitives (Integer is a class, int is a primitive type.), this means checking if the values are equal. For objects, this means checking if the address/pointer is equal.

## `equals(Object o)`
```java
public boolean equals(Object other) {
        if (this == other) {
            return true;
        }
        if (other == null) {
            return false;
        }
        if (other.getClass() != this.getClass()) {
            return false;
        }
        ArraySet<T> o = (ArraySet<T>) other;
        if (o.size() != this.size()) {
            return false;
        }
        for (T item : this) {
            if (!o.contains(item)) {
                return false;
            }
        }
        return true;
    }
```

**Rules for Equals in Java:** When overriding a .equals() method, it may sometimes be trickier than it seems. A couple of rules to adhere to while implementing your `.equals()` method are as follows:

1.) equals must be an equivalence relation
- **reflexive**: x.equals(x) is true
- **symmetric**: x.equals(y) if and only if y.equals(x)
- **transitive**: x.equals(y) and y.equals(z) implies x.equals(z)

2.) It must take an Object argument, in order to override the original `.equals()` method (If it takes an argument other than Object, that would be overloading.)

3.) It must be consistent if `x.equals(y)`, then as long as x and y remain unchanged: x must continue to equal y

4.) It is never true for null `x.equals(null)` must be false
