# Lecture
- [Skip list can get good search performance.](https://youtu.be/AcRKQOe0zYg?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD5JBcKwLbuUf6BAdotM4-1K&t=130)
- [BST inventing](https://youtu.be/AcRKQOe0zYg?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD5JBcKwLbuUf6BAdotM4-1K&t=173)
- [A rookie mistake for recursion (arm length recursion)](https://youtu.be/otDvoMb8UqE?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD5JBcKwLbuUf6BAdotM4-1K&t=226)
- [BST deleting doesn't need back pointer. No spoiler](https://youtu.be/vPzB6svl4rc?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD5JBcKwLbuUf6BAdotM4-1K&t=134)
- [Hibbard deletion for deleting BST' root](https://youtu.be/vPzB6svl4rc?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD5JBcKwLbuUf6BAdotM4-1K&t=392)

# Overview
**Abstract Data Type.** An abstract data type (ADT) is similar to an interface in that it is defined by its operations rather than its implementation. It is a layer of abstraction not tied to a particular language. Some examples of ADT’s you may have seen in class so far include Lists, Sets, and Maps. Notice that a List can be implemented in several different ways (i.e. LinkedList, ArrayList) and the idea of a List is not restricted to just Java.

**Trees.** A tree consists of a set of nodes and a set of edges that connect these nodes. As there exists only one path between any two nodes, there are no cycles in a tree. If a tree is rooted, every node except the root has exactly one parent. The root has no parents, and a node with no children is considered a leaf.

**Binary Search Trees.** A Binary Search Tree (BST) is a rooted binary tree that maintains several key conditions to help optimize search. For a node X, every key in the left subtree is less than X’s key and every key in the right subtree is greater than X’s key. This aids with operations such as search since when we look for the position of a key, we can move left or right within our tree starting from the root depending on how our key compares to the key of each node.

**Runtime.** BST’s help optimize our search so we do not always have to look at every single element in our tree when searching for a particular key. But how much does this optimize things? For a BST that is “bushy” (short and fat), we can search in O(log N) time where N is the number of nodes. For a BST that is “spindly” (tall and skinny), our search will take O(N) time. This is because search time depends on the height of our tree, where a bushy tree has a height of log N and a spindly tree has a height of N.

# ADTs

## Intro to ADTs
An Abstract Data Type (ADT) is defined only by its operations, not by its implementation.

Some commonly used ADT's are:
 - Stacks: Structures that support last-in first-out retrieval of elements
    - `push(int x)`: puts x on the top of the stack
    - `int pop()`: takes the element on the top of the stack
  - **Lists**: an ordered set of elements
    - `add(int i)`: adds an element
    - `int get(int i)`: gets element at index i
  - **Sets**: an unordered set of unique elements (no repeats)
    - `add(int i)`: adds an element
    - `contains(int i)`: returns a boolean for whether or not the set contains the value
  - **Maps**: set of key/value pairs
    - `put(K key, V value)`: puts a key value pair into the map
    - `V get(K key)`: gets the value corresponding to the key

**The bolded ADT's** are a subinterfaces of a bigger overarching interface called `Collections`

## Binary Search Trees

TL;DR: In binary search, we know the list is sorted, so we can use this information to narrow our search. First, we look at the middle element. If it is bigger than the element we are searching for, we look to the left of it. If it is smaller than the element we are searching for, we look to the right. We then look at the middle element of the respective halves and repeat the process until we find the element we are looking for (or don't find it because the list doesn't contain it).

But how do we run binary search for a linked list?
1. One optimization we can implement is to have a reference to the middle node. This way, we can get to the middle in constant time.
2. Then, if we *flip* the nodes' pointers, which allows us to traverse to both the left and right halves, we can decrease our runtime by half!
3. We can further optimize by adding pointers to the middle of each recursive half.
4. Now, if you stretch this structure vertically, you will see a tree!
5. This specific tree is called a **binary tree** because each juncture splits in 2.

### Properties of trees

Trees are composed of:
- nodes
- edges that connect those nodes.
  - Constraint: there is only one path between any two nodes.

In some trees, we select a **root** node which is a node that has no parents.

A tree also has **leaves**, which are nodes with no children.

Relating this to the original tree structure we came up with earlier, we can now introduce new constraints to the already existing constraints. This creates more specific types of trees, two examples being Binary Trees and Binary Search Trees.

- **Binary Trees**: in addition to the above requirements, also hold the binary property constraint. That is, each node has either 0, 1, or 2 children.

- **Binary Search Trees**: in addition to all of the above requirements, also hold the property that For every node X in the tree:
  - Every key in the left subtree is less than X’s key.
  - Every key in the right subtree is greater than X’s key. **Remember this property!! We will reference it a lot throughout the duration of this module and 61B.


Here is the BST class we will be using in this module:
```java
private class BST<Key> {
    private Key key;
    private BST left;
    private BST right;

    public BST(Key key, BST left, BST Right) {
        this.key = key;
        this.left = left;
        this.right = right;
    }

    public BST(Key key) {
        this.key = key;
    }
}
```

### Search
```java
static BST find(BST T, Key sk) {
   if (T == null)
      return null;
   if (sk.equals(T.key))
      return T;
   else if (sk < T.key)
      return find(T.left, sk);
   else
      return find(T.right, sk);
}
```

### Insert
We always insert at a leaf node!

First, we search in the tree for the node. If we find it, then we don't do anything. If we don't find it, we will be at a leaf node already. At this point, we can just add the new element to either the left or right of the leaf, preserving the BST property.
```java
static BST insert(BST T, Key ik) {
    if (T == null)
        return new BST(ik);
    else if (ik < T.key)
        T.left = insert(T.left, ik);
    else if
        T.right = insert(T.right, ik);
    return T;
}
```
**Exercise 10.2.4:** Think of an order of insertions that would result in [differing heights of trees](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/49714321/minimum-height-insertion-orders-for-a-binary-search-tree). Try to find the two extreme cases for the height of a tree. Hint: Your first insertion will determine much of the behavior for the following insertions.

### Delete

Deleting from a binary tree is a little bit more complicated because whenever we delete, we need to make sure we reconstruct the tree and still maintain its BST property.

Let's break this problem down into three categories:

- the node we are trying to delete has no children
- has 1 child
- has 2 children

**No children**

If the node has no children, it is a leaf, and we can just delete its parent pointer and the node will eventually be swept away by the garbage collector.

**One child**

If the node only has one child, we know that the child maintains the BST property with the parent of the node because the property is recursive to the right and left subtrees. Therefore, we can just reassign the parent's child pointer to the node's child and the node will eventually be garbage collected.

**Two children** (Delete the root)

If the node has two children, the process becomes a little more complicated because we can't just assign one of the children to be the new root. This might break the BST property.

Instead, we choose a new node to replace the deleted one. (**Hibbard deletion**)

We know that the new node must:
- be > than everything in left subtree.
- be < than everything right subtree.

To find these nodes, you can just take the right-most node in the left subtree or the left-most node in the right subtree.

### BSTs as Sets and Maps
We can use a BST to implement the `Set` ADT! But its even better because in an `ArraySet`, we have worst-case $O(n)$ runtime to run `contains` because we need to search the entire set. However, if we use a BST, we can decrease this runtime to $\log (n)$ because of the BST property which enables us to use binary search!

We can also make a binary tree into a map by having each BST node hold `(key,value)` pairs instead of singular values. We will compare each element's key in order to determine where to place it within our tree.

## Summary
Abstract data types (ADTs) are defined in terms of operations, not implementation.

Several useful ADTs:

- Disjoint Sets, Map, Set, List.
- Java provides Map, Set, List interfaces, along with several implementations.

We’ve seen two ways to implement a Set (or Map):

- ArraySet: $\Theta(N)$ operations in the worst case.
- BST: $\Theta(\log N)$ operations if tree is balanced.

BST Implementations:

- Search and insert are straightforward (but insert is a little tricky).
- Deletion is more challenging. Typical approach is “Hibbard deletion”.

# Q&A
- [https://youtu.be/wTAFtYZ4wdY?t=414]
  - a) $\Theta(\log N)$
  - c) $\Theta(N^2 + N^4) \in \Theta(N^4)$ (The nestedSum took (x.length^2)^2 time --> N^4)
  - [`for (int i=0; i <= N % 10; i++) {f(N/10)};`](https://youtu.be/wTAFtYZ4wdY?t=1086)
    - The worst case: 99999... -> runtime: $\Theta (10^{\log_{10} (N+1)})$ (N=9 then it will run 10 times)
    - So it's just $O(N)$
- [Mergesort can be made "adaptive"](https://youtu.be/wTAFtYZ4wdY?t=1998)
  - If the largest item in one array is smaller than the smallest item in other, just copy everything and no neeed compare.
  - If you make this tweak and many others, you end up with Timsort.
- [A general binary search tree in which every node has either zero or two children but still $\Theta (N)$](https://youtu.be/wTAFtYZ4wdY?t=3164)