# Lecture
- [B-Trees are a real pain to implement, and suffer from performance problems.](https://youtu.be/kkd8d0QhiQ0?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD6aKgTz2W-foDiTeBEaBoS3&t=58)
  - Maintaining different node types.
  - Interconversion of nodes between 2-nodes and 3-nodes.
  - Walking up the tree to split nodes.
- [Catalan number in CS thoery](https://youtu.be/kkd8d0QhiQ0?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD6aKgTz2W-foDiTeBEaBoS3&t=188)
  - Related to recursive datas tructure
- [We can move from any configuration to any other in 2n - 6 rotations](https://youtu.be/kkd8d0QhiQ0?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD6aKgTz2W-foDiTeBEaBoS3&t=244)
- [`rotateLeft` a node with no right child is undefined](https://youtu.be/b4-2-6R2gzU?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD6aKgTz2W-foDiTeBEaBoS3&t=235)
- ["Red" (glue links) are used commonly used in practice (e.g. java.util.TreeSet)](https://youtu.be/q7sfCkdrtEs?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD6aKgTz2W-foDiTeBEaBoS3&t=251)
- [Java's TreeMap is not left leaning and 2-3-4 red-black tree](https://youtu.be/uNrmQ_EwJLU?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD6aKgTz2W-foDiTeBEaBoS3&t=223)
  - Maintains correspondence  with 2-3-4 tree (is not a 1-1 correspondence).
  - Allows glue links on either side.
  - More complex implementation, said significantly faster. (Josh didn't analyze by himself)
- [Other self balancing trees and sets and maps implementation](https://youtu.be/uNrmQ_EwJLU?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD6aKgTz2W-foDiTeBEaBoS3&t=286)
  - Red-black tree is one of the best.

# Q&A
- [A program for runtime analysis is mathematically impossible](https://youtu.be/8iPB_aXIq34?t=153)
- [LLRB is a relatively recent idea](https://youtu.be/8iPB_aXIq34?t=450)
  - It's didactic, has equally good asymptotic runtime and really clear mathematical idea.
  - But the constant is worse than standard red-black trees.
- [Clean Hibbard Deletion is very hard to write](https://youtu.be/8iPB_aXIq34?t=807)
- [Josh predicted joint gaussian distribution prblem in his possibility course exam](https://youtu.be/8iPB_aXIq34?t=998)
  - Joint pdf for joint gaussian.
- [Hibbard Deletion runtime](https://youtu.be/8iPB_aXIq34?t=1122)
  - Finding the item should be $O \log(N)$.
  - Finding the successor should be $O \log(N)$.
  - Changing four pointers.
  - Should be $\log (N)$ time.
- [The ability to convince myself that my code works and extricate myself from situations that doesn't](https://youtu.be/8iPB_aXIq34?t=1259)
- [Josh's ratio for producing tutorial is 15:1 to 20:1](https://youtu.be/8iPB_aXIq34?t=1407)
- [When being asked the favorite computer scientist, Josh first thought about Masters of Deception](https://youtu.be/8iPB_aXIq34?t=1587)
  - "Crime" is the keyword for early topic.
  - Josh loved the book.
  - Strogatz wrote a really good book on nonlinear dynamics.
  - Scott Aaronson
- [Review starting from BST](https://youtu.be/8iPB_aXIq34?t=1803)

# Balanced Trees
## Rotating Trees
The formal definition of rotation is:

`rotateLeft(G): Let x be the right child of G. Make G the new left child of x.`
`rotateRight(G): Let x be the left child of G. Make G the new right child of x.`

G's right child, P, merges with G, bringing its children along. P then passes its left child to G and G goes down to the left to become P's left child. You can see that the structure of the tree changes as well as the number of levels. We can also rotate on a non-root node. We just disconnect the node from the parent temporarily, rotate the subtree at the node, then reconnect the new root.

```java
private Node rotateRight(Node h) {
    // assert (h != null) && isRed(h.left);
    Node x = h.left;
    h.left = x.right;
    x.right = h;
    return x;
}

// make a right-leaning link lean to the left
private Node rotateLeft(Node h) {
    // assert (h != null) && isRed(h.right);
    Node x = h.right;
    h.right = x.left;
    x.left = h;
    return x;
}
```

[Demo: Balancing with Tree Rotation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1pfkQENfIBwiThGGFVO5xvlVp7XAUONI2BwBqYxib0A4/edit#slide=id.g465b5392c_00)

## Red-Black Trees

We said in the previous section that we really like 2-3 trees because they always remain balanced, but we also don't like them because they are hard to implement. But why not both? Why not create a tree that is implemented using a BST, but is structurally identical to a 2-3 tree and thus stays balanced? (Note that in this chapter we will be honing in on 2-3 Trees specifically, not 2-3-4 trees)

### Enter the Red-Black Tree

- For a 2-3 tree that only has 2-nodes (nodes with 2 children), we already have a BST.
- What happens when we get a 3-node?
  - One thing we could do is create a "glue" node that doesn't hold any information and only serves to show that its 2 children are actually a part of one node.
  - This is a very inelegant solution because we are taking up more space and the code will be ugly.
  - We will use glue links instead
- We choose **arbitrarily** to make the left element a child of the right one. This results in a **left-leaning** tree.
- We make glue link red. Normal links are black. Because of this, we call these structures **left-leaning red-black trees (LLRB)**.

Left-Leaning Red-Black trees have a 1-1 correspondence with 2-3 trees. Every 2-3 tree has a unique LLRB red-black tree associated with it. As for 2-3-4 trees, they maintain correspondence with standard Red-Black trees.

### Properties of LLRB's
Here are the properties of LLRB's:

- 1-1 correspondence with 2-3 trees.
- No node has 2 red links.
- There are no red right-links.
- Every path from root to leaf has same number of black links (because 2-3 trees have same number of links to every leaf).
- Height is no more than 2x height of corresponding 2-3 tree. (max should be H (every black link) + H (every child-node contains a red link) + 1 (root node can also have red link) = 2H+1)

### Inserting into LLRB
We can always insert into a LLRB tree by inserting into a 2-3 tree and converting it using the scheme from above. However, this would be contrary to our original purpose of creating a LLRB. Instead, we insert into the LLRB as we would with a normal BST with a few rules.

- The color of the link we add should always be red.
  - Because in a 2-3 tree, we are always inserting by adding to a leaf node.
- If we insert on the right, we will need to use a left rotation to change its structure to left-leaning.
  - We are using *left-leaning* red black trees, which means we can never have a right red link.
  - However, *if we were to insert on the right with a red link and the left child is **also** a red link*, then we will temporarily allow it.
- If there are 2 left red links, we will right rotate the top node to create the same tree seen above.
- Then, in both situations, we will flip the colors of all edges touching the node.
  - This operation is recursive, e.g, you flip the edge above, and the node above have two red links.

You may need to go through a series of rotations in order to complete the transformation. The process is: while the LLRB tree does not satisfy the 1-1 correspondence with a 2-3 tree or breaks the LLRB invariants, perform task depending on the condition of the tree until you get a legal LLRB.

## Runtime
Because a left-leaning red-black tree has a 1-1 correspondence with a 2-3 tree and will always remain within 2x the height of its 2-3 tree, the runtimes of the operations will take $\log N$ time.

Here's the abstracted code for insertion into a LLRB:
```java
private Node put(Node h, Key key, Value val) {
    if (h == null) { return new Node(key, val, RED); }

    int cmp = key.compareTo(h.key);
    if (cmp < 0)      { h.left  = put(h.left,  key, val); }
    else if (cmp > 0) { h.right = put(h.right, key, val); }
    else              { h.val   = val;                    }

    if (isRed(h.right) && !isRed(h.left))      { h = rotateLeft(h);  }
    if (isRed(h.left)  &&  isRed(h.left.left)) { h = rotateRight(h); }
    if (isRed(h.left)  &&  isRed(h.right))     { flipColors(h);      } 

    return h;
}
```
Look how short and sweet!

## Summary
- Binary search trees are simple, but they are subject to imbalance which leads to crappy runtime.
- 2-3 Trees (B Trees) are balanced, but painful to implement and relatively slow.
- LLRBs insertion is simple to implement (but deletion is hard).
  - Works by maintaining mathematical bijection with a 2-3 trees.
- Java’s `TreeMap` is a red-black tree (but not left leaning).
  - LLRBs maintain correspondence with 2-3 tree, Standard Red-Black trees maintain correspondence with 2-3-4 trees.
  - Allows glue links on either side (see Red-Black Tree).
  - More complex implementation, but significantly faster.