# Lecture
- [A Useful Visual Trick for Humans to traverse a tree](https://youtu.be/wkkCVWn7au4?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4tIQrwqsx16fNq6uXNhauw&t=489)
  - Preorder traversal: We trace a path around the graph, from the top going counter-clockwise. “Visit” every time we pass the LEFT of a node.
  - Inorder traversal: “Visit” when you cross the bottom of a node.
  - Postorder traversal: “Visit” when you cross the right a node.
- [What Good Are All These Traversals](https://youtu.be/wkkCVWn7au4?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4tIQrwqsx16fNq6uXNhauw&t=589)
  - Preorder: printing directory; gathering file  sizes.
- [Josh wrote a 'cheat' for knowing oppoent's APM in SC2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wkkCVWn7au4&t=590s)
- [Euler Tour and Hamilton Tour](https://youtu.be/-pQ3bcBsA9w?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4tIQrwqsx16fNq6uXNhauw&t=278)
  - An efficient Euler tour algorithm O(# edges) was found as early as 1873 [Link](https://ethkim.github.io/TA/251/eulerian.pdf).
  - Despite decades of intense study, no efficient algorithm for a Hamilton tour exists. Best algorithms are exponential time.
- [Graph problems are hard](https://youtu.be/-pQ3bcBsA9w?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4tIQrwqsx16fNq6uXNhauw&t=295)
  - Way off the chart than runtime and inheritance.

# Overview
**Trees.** A tree consists of a set of nodes and a set of edges connecting the nodes, where there is only one path between any two nodes. A tree is thus a graph with no cycles and all vertices connected.

**Traversals.** When we iterate over a tree, we call this a “tree traversal”.

**Level Order Traversal.** A level-order traversal visits every item at level 0, then level 1, then level 2, and so forth.

**Depth First Traversals.** We have three depth first traversals: Pre-order, in-order and post-order. In a pre-order traversal, we visit a node, then traverse its children. In an in-order traversal, we traverse the left child, visit a node, then traverse the right child. In a post-order traversal, we traverse both children before visiting. These are very natural to implement recursively. Pre-order and post-order generalize naturally to trees with arbtirary numbers of children. In-order only makes sense for binary trees.

**Graphs.** A graph consists of a set of nodes and a set of edges connecting the nodes. However, unlike our tree definition, we can have more than one path between nodes. Note that all trees are graphs. In CS 61B, we can assume all graphs are simple graphs (AKA no loops or parallel edges).

**Depth First Traversals.** DFS for graphs is similar to DFS for trees, but since there are potential cycles within our graph, we add the constraint that each vertex should be visited at most once. This can be accomplished by marking nodes as visited and only visiting a node if it had not been marked as visited already.

# Tree Traversals and Graphs
## Tree recap
### What's a rooted tree?
Recall that a rooted tree is a tree with a designated root (typically drawn as the top most node.)

This gives us the notion of two more definitions

- A parent. Every node except the root has exactly one parent.
  - What if a node had 2 parents? Would it be a tree? (Hint: No.)
- A child. A node can have 0 or more children.
  - What if a node has 0 children? It's called a leaf.

## Tree Traversals
Now how do you iterate over a tree? What's the correct 'order'?

Before we answer that question, we must not use the word iteration. Instead, we'll call it 'traversing through a tree' or a 'tree traversal'. Why? No **real** reason, except that everyone calls iteration through trees 'traversals'. Maybe it's because the world likes alliterations.

So what are some natural ways to 'traverse' through a tree? As it turns out, there are a few –– unlike a list which basically has one natural way to iterate through it:

- Level order traversal.
- Depth-First traversals –– of which there are three: pre-order, in-order and post-order.

### Level Order Traversal
This is more difficult than the writing the other traversals
```java
levelOrderRec(BSTNode x) {
    for (int h = 0; h < height(x); h++) {
        printLevel(x, h);
    }
}

printLevel(BSTNode x, int h) {
    if (x == null) return;
    else if (h == 0) pirnt(x.key);
    else {
    printLevel(x.left, h-1);
    printLevel(x.right, h-1);
    }
}

levelOrderIter(BSTNode x) {
    Queue<BSTNode> x = new Queue<>();
    x.enqueue(x);
    while(!x.isEmpty()) {
        BSTNode tmp = x.dequeue();
        System.out.print(tmp.key);
        x.enqueue(x.left);
        x.enqueue(x.right);
    }
}
```

### Pre/In/Post-order Traversal
```java
Order(BSTNode x) {
    if (x == null) return;
    //print(x.key) pre-order
    Order(x.left)
    //print(x.key) in-order
    Order(x.right)
    //print(x.key) post-order
}
```

## Graphs
### What is a graph?
A graph consists of:
- A set of nodes (or vertices)
- A set of zero of more edges, each of which connects two nodes.

That's it! No other restrictions. *In general, note that all trees are also graphs, but not all graphs are trees.*

### Simple Graphs only
Multigraphs:
- multiple edges between two nodes
- an edge from a node to itself

### More categorizations.
- **undirected graphs** an edge `(u, v)` can mean that the edge goes from the nodes u to v and from the nodes v to u too.
- **directed graphs** the edge (u, v) means that the edge starts at u, and goes to v (and the vice versa is not true, unless the edge `(v, u)` also exists.)
- **acyclic graphs** These are graphs that don't have any cycles.
- **cyclic graphs** There exists a way to start at a node, follow some **unique** edges, and return back to the same node you started from.

## Graph Problems
There are many questions we can ask about a graph.

- **s-t Path:** Is there a path between vertices s and t?
- **Connectivity:** Is the graph connected, i.e. is there a path between all vertices?
- **Biconnectivity:** Is there a vertex whose removal disconnects the graph?
- **Shortest s-t Path:** What is the shortest path between vertices s and t?
- **Cycle Detection:** Does the graph contain any cycles?
- **Euler Tour:** Is there a cycle that uses every edge exactly once?
- **Hamilton Tour:** Is there a cycle that uses every vertex exactly once?
- **Planarity:** Can you draw the graph on paper with no crossing edges?
- **Isomorphism:** Are two graphs isomorphic (the same graph in disguise)?

Some comments:
- It's very hard to *tell* which problems are very hard, and which ones aren't all that hard.
- The Euler Tour was solved as early as 1873. The solution runs in $O(E)$ where $E$ is the number of edges in the graph.
- The current most efficient solution to the Hamilton Tour problems is exponiential.

### `isConnected(s, t)`
write a function `isConnected(s, t)` that takes in two vertices and returns whether there exists a path between the two.
```java
mark s  // i.e., remember that you visited s already
if (s == t):
    return true;

for child in unmarked_neighbors(s): // if a neighbor is marked, ignore!
    if isconnected(child, t):
        return true;

return false;
```
You may not have realized it, but we just developed a depth-first traversal (like pre-order, post-order, in-order) but for graphs. What did we do? Well, we marked ourself. Then we visited our first child. Then our first child marked itself, and visited its children. Then our first child's first child marked itself, and visited its children.
