# Lecture
- [How far away from one actor to another](https://youtu.be/5oL3cgC65KY?t=728)
  - Some difficult mathmatical problems are just simple graph problems in disguise.
  - BFS could be used to find the shortest connection (not edges with value).
- [Why BFS is bad for Google Maps](https://youtu.be/5oL3cgC65KY?t=874)
- [Adjacency list is the most popular implementation for graph](https://youtu.be/5oL3cgC65KY?t=1670)
  - Because graph usually is sparse. 
- [$O(V+E)$ is very common in graph algorithms](https://youtu.be/5oL3cgC65KY?t=1850)
- [Is there a case where you use two or more representations and use the fastest operation among these representations?](https://youtu.be/5oL3cgC65KY?t=2108)
  - Yes, but the cost is that you need to maintain two data structure copy.
  - I believe in Database it happens.
- [Common design pattern in graph algorithms: Decouple type from processing algorithm](https://youtu.be/5oL3cgC65KY?t=2240)
  - Create a graph object.
  - Pass the graph to a graph-processing method (or constructor) in a client class.
  - Query the client class for information.
- [We cannot say $O(E)$ for the DFP constructor](https://youtu.be/5oL3cgC65KY?t=2598)
  - If there is no edge you still need to mark the marked array which is $\Theta (V)$.
- [DepthFirstPaths is more a toy program for lecture purpose](https://youtu.be/5oL3cgC65KY?t=2720)

# Overview
**Graph Traversals Overview.** Just as we had both depth-first (preorder, inorder, and postorder) traversals and a breath-first (level order) traversal for trees, we can generalize these concepts to graphs. Specifically, given a source vertex, we can “visit” vertices in:
- DFS Preorder: order in which DFS is called on each vertex.
- DFS Postorder: order in which we return from DFS calls.
- BFS: order of distance from the source. The lecture originally called this “level order” before we banish that term since nobody uses it in the real world for general graphs.

We use the term “depth first”, because we will explore [“deeply” first](https://xkcd.com/761/), and use the term “breadth first” because we go wide before we go deep.

If we use BFS on a vertex of a graph that happens to be the root of a tree, we get exactly the same thing as level order traversal.

**Breadth First Search.** Unlike DFS, BFS lends itself more naturally to an iterative solution than a recursive one. When we perform BFS, we visit a source vertex s, then visit every vertex that is one link away from s, then visite very vertex that is two links away from s, and so forth.

To achieve this, we use a simple idea: Create a so-called “fringe” of vertices that we think of as the next vertices to be explored. In the case of BFS, this fringe is a Queue, since we want to visit vertices in the order that we observe them. The pseudocode is as follows:
```java
bfs(s):
    fringe.enqueue(s)
    mark(s)
    while fringe is not empty:
        dequeue(s)
        visit(s)
        for each unmarked neighbor of s:
            mark(s)
            enqueue(s)
```
In class, we discussed how we could use BFS to solve the shortest paths problem: Given a source vertex, find the shortest path from that source to every other vertex. When solving shortest paths, we add additional logic to our BFS traversal, where we also set the edgeTo for every vertex at the same time that it is marked and enqueued.

**Graph API.** In lecture, we used the Graph API from the Princeton algorithms book. Choice of API determines how clients need to think to write codes, since certain API’s can make certain tasks easier or harder. This can also affect runtime and memory.

**Graph Implementations.** Several graph API implementations we explored included an adjacency matrix, list of edges, and adjacency lists. With an adjacency matrix, we essentially have a 2D array with a boolean indicating whether two vertices are adjacent. A list of edges is simply that – a collection of all edges, such as HashSet. The most common approach, adjacency lists, maintains an array of lists indexed by vertex number which stores the vertex numbers of all vertices adjacent to the given vertex.

# Graph Traversals and Representation
## BFS
In [s-t-Path-Problem](./21.%20Tree%20and%20Graph%20Traversals.md##Graph-Problems), we developed DFS (Depth First Search) Traversal for graphs. In DFS, we visit down the entire lineage of our first child before we even begin to look at our second child - we literally search depth first.

Here, we will talk about BFS (Breadth First Search) (also known as Level Order Traversal). In BFS, we visit all of our immediate children before continuing on to any of our grandchildren. The pseudocode for BFS is as follows:
```
Initialize the fringe (queue)
mark the starting vertex.
enqueue the starting vertex on the fringe
while fringe is not empty:
    dequeue vertex v from the fringe.
    For each unmarked neighbor n of v:
        Mark n.
        Add n to fringe.
        Set edgeTo[n] = v.
        Set distTo[n] = distTo[v] + 1.
```
- A *fringe* is just a term we use for the data structure we are using to store the nodes on the frontier of our traversal's discovery process.
  - For BFS, we use a queue for our fringe.	
- `edgeTo[...]` is a map that helps us track how we got to node `n`; we got to it by following the edge from `v` to to `n`.
- `distTo[...]` is a map that helps us track how far `n` is from the starting vertex. Assuming that each edge is worth a distance of 1.
- This [slide deck](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1JoYCelH4YE6IkSMq_LfTJMzJ00WxDj7rEa49gYmAtc4/edit#slide=id.g76e0dad85_2_380) illustrates how this pseudocode can be carried out on an example graph.

### DFS vs BFS
**Question 18.1:** What graph traversal algorithm uses a stack rather than a queue for its fringe?

**Answer 18.1:** DFS traversal.

- Note however that for DFS we mark nodes only once we visit a node.
- As a result, it's possible to have multiple instances of the same node on the stack.

Recursive DFS implements this naturally via the recursive stack frames; iterative DFS implements it manually:
```
Initialize the fringe, an empty stack
push the starting vertex on the fringe
while fringe is not empty:
    pop a vertex off the fringe
    if vertex is not marked:
        mark the vertex
        visit vertex
        for each neighbor of vertex:
            if neighbor not marked:
                push neighbor to fringe

# I want to use this to avoid the additional if statement.
# But this causes a discrepancy between the recursive one,
# as you 'mark' the node before actually visit it.
# So Josh is right, multiple instances of the same node on the stack are unvoidable if
# you want to mimic the recursive behavior.
Initialize the fringe, an empty stack
push the starting vertex on the fringe
mark the starting vertex
while fringe is not empty:
    pop a vertex off the fringe
    visit vertex
    for each neighbor of vertex:
        if neighbor not marked:
            push neighbor to fringe
            mark the neighbor
```

## Representing Graphs
We will discuss our choice of **API**, and also the **underlying data structures** used to represent the graph. Our decisions can have profound implications on our *runtime*, *memory usage*, and *difficulty of implementing various graph algorithms*.

### Graph API
```java
public class Graph {
  public Graph(int V):               // Create empty graph with v vertices
  public void addEdge(int v, int w): // add an edge v-w
  Iterable<Integer> adj(int v):      // vertices adjacent to v
  int V():                           // number of vertices
  int E():                           // number of edges
...
```

### Graph Representations
#### Adjacency Matrix
#### Edge Sets
#### Adjacency Lists

In practice, adjacency lists are most common since graphs tend to be sparse (there are not many edges in each bucket).

#### Efficiency
|       idea       | addEdge(s, t) | for(w : adj(v)) | print()  | hasEdge(s, t) | space used |
| :--------------: | :-----------: | :-------------: | :------: | :-----------: | :--------: |
| adjacency matrix |     Θ(1)      |      Θ(V)       | Θ($V^2$) |     Θ(1)      |  Θ($V^2$)  |
|  list of edges   |     Θ(1)      |      Θ(E)       |   Θ(E)   |     Θ(E)      |    Θ(E)    |
|  adjacency list  |     Θ(1)      |  Θ(1) to Θ(V)   |  Θ(V+E)  | Θ(degree(v))  |   Θ(E+V)   |

DFS/BFS on a graph backed by adjacency lists runs in $O(V+E)$, while on a graph backed by an adjacency matrix runs in $O(V^2)$.

# Q&A
- [For recursive problems, counting the recursive calls is good but not always](https://youtu.be/-OuYtTGTsN8?t=1462)