# Lecture
- [The shortest path solution to all targets is always a tree](https://youtu.be/iMoFtG1md3w?t=854)
  - It's also the case for undirected graph.
  - The number of edges of shortest path tree is always $V-1$.
- [Directed graph is more general than undirected and easy to think about](https://youtu.be/iMoFtG1md3w?t=976)
  - You can add the all paths with the s and t reversed with the same weight to achieve the undirected graph.
- [When a relaxation operation is performed on a visited node, it will always fail](https://youtu.be/iMoFtG1md3w?t=2098)
- [How to deal with negative weight?](https://youtu.be/iMoFtG1md3w?t=2250)
  - If there's no cycle, you just do a BFT, relaxing as you go.
  - If there are cycles, you can use bellman-ford.
    - For every vertex, relax V times.
  - Example: currency trading.
  - Dijkstra's can fail because relaxation of already visited verices can succeed.
- [A*](https://youtu.be/iMoFtG1md3w?t=2781)
  - Add `h(v, goal)` (heuristic expectation) to the fringe.
  - Instead of exploring exhaustively, we're using a best guess to guide our search.
  - https://qiao.github.io/PathFinding.js/visual/
  - For A* to give the correct answer, our A* heuristic must be:
    - Admissible: h(v, NYC) $\leq$ true distance from v to NYC
    - Consistent: For each neighbor of w:
      - h(v, NYC) $\leq$ dist(v, w) + h(w, NYC)
      - Where dist(v, w) is the weight of the edge from v to w.
- [Consistency and Admissibility](https://youtu.be/iMoFtG1md3w?t=3251)
  - All consistent heuristics are admissible.

# Overview
**Dijktra’s Algorithm and Single-Source Shortest Paths.** Suppose we want to record the shortest paths from some source to every single other vertex (so that we can rapidly found a route from s to X, from s to Y, and so forth). We already know how to do this if we’re only counting the number of edges, we just use BFS.

But if edges have weights (representing, for example road lengths), we have to do something else. It turns out that even considering edge weights, we can preprocess the shortest route from the source to every vertex very efficiently. We store the answer as a “shortest paths tree”. Typically, a shortest paths tree is stored as an array of edgeTo[] values (and optionally distTo[] values if we want a constant time distTo() operation).

To find the SPT, we can use Dijkstra’s algorithm, which is quite simple once you understand it. Essentially, we visit each vertex in order of its distance from the source, where each visit consists of relaxing every edge. Informally, relaxing an edge means using it if its better than the best known distance to the target vertex, otherwise ignoring it. Or in pseudocode:
```
Dijkstra(G, s):
    while not every vertex has been visited:
        visit(unmarked vertex v for which distTo(v) is minimized)
```
Where visit is given by the following pseudocode:
```
visit(v):
    mark(v)
    for each edge e of s:
        relax(e)
```
And finally, relax is given by:
```
relax(e):
    v = e.source
    w = e.target        
    currentBestKnownWeight = distTo(w)
    possiblyBetterWeight = distTo(v) + e.weight
    if possiblyBetterWeight < currentBestKnownWeight
        Use e instead of whatever we were using before
```
Runtime is $O(V×logV+V×logV+E×logV)$, and since $E>V$ for any graph we’d run Dijkstra’s algorithm on, this can be written as more simply $O(E log V)$. See slides for runtime description.

**A* Single-Target Shortest Paths.** If we need only the path to a single target, then Dijkstra’s is inefficient as it explores many many edges that we don’t care about (e.g. when routing from Denver to NYC, we’d explore everything within more than a thousand miles in all directions before reaching NYC).

To fix this, we make a very minor change to Dijkstra’s, where instead of visiting vertices in order of distance from the source, we visit them in order of distance from the source + h(v), where h(v) is some heuristic.

Or in pseudocode:
```
A*(G, s):
    while not every vertex has been visited:
        visit(unmarked vertex v for which distTo(v) + h(v) is minimized)
```
It turns out (but we did not prove), that as long as h(v) is less than the true distance from s to v, then the result of A* will always be correct.

Note: In the version in class, we did not use an explicit ‘mark’. Instead, we tossed everything in the PQ, and we effectively considered a vertex marked if it had been removed from the PQ.

# Shortest Paths

## Recalls

BFS and DFS both can:
- find a path from a given vertex, $s$, to every reachable vertex in the graph.

BFS can but DFS cannot:
- find a **shortest path** from a given vertex, $s$ to every reachable vertex in the graph.

Efficiency:
- DFS is worse for spindly graphs. Imagine a graph with 10000 nodes all spindly. We'll end up making 10000 recursive calls, which is bad for space.
- BFS is worse for "bushy" graphs, because our queue gets used a lot.

But the shortest path found by BFS is weightless, **where shortest means the fewest number of edges**. 

## Dijkstra's Algorithm

### Observations

1. What we care to minimize is the sum of the weights of the edges on the selected path.
2. Shortest paths tree can be created in the following way:
   - For every vertex $v$ (which is not $s$) in the graph, find the shortest path from $s$ to $v$.
   - "Combine"/"Union" all the edges that you found above.
3. The "Shortest Path Tree" will always be a tree.
   - Think about our original solution where there is an `edgeTo` array.
   - For every node, there was exactly one "parent".
   - A tree has $V-1$ edges, where $V$ is the number of nodes in the tree.

### Dijkstra's Algorithm

Dijkstra's algorithm takes in an input vertex $s$, and outputs the shortest path tree from $s$. How does it work?

1. Create a priority queue.
2. Add s to the priority queue with priority $0$. Add all other vertices to the priority queue with priority $\infty$.
3. While the priority queue is not empty: pop a vertex out of the priority queue, and **relax** all of the edges going out from the vertex.

#### **What does it mean to relax?**

- Look at your current best distance to $w$ from the source, call it $\texttt{curBestDistToW}$.
- Look at your $\texttt{curBestDistTo}\textbf{V}$ + $\texttt{weight}(v, w)$. (let's call it \texttt{potentialDistToWUsingV})
- Is $\texttt{potentialDistToWUsingV}$ smaller than $\texttt{curBestDistToW}$? 
  - In that case, set $\texttt{curBestDistToW} = \texttt{potentialDistToWUsingV}$, and update the $\texttt{edgeTo}[w]$ to be $v$.
- **Important note: we never relax edges that point to already visited vertices.**

#### **Pseudocode**
```
def dijkstras(source):
    PQ.add(source, 0)
    For all other vertices, v, PQ.add(v, infinity)
    while PQ is not empty:
        p = PQ.removeSmallest()
        relax(all edges from p)

def relax(edge p,q):
   if q is visited (i.e., q is not in PQ):
       return

   if distTo[p] + weight(edge) < distTo[q]:
       distTo[q] = distTo[p] + w
       edgeTo[q] = p
       PQ.changePriority(q, distTo[q])
```

#### **Guarantees**
As long as the edges are all non-negative, Dijkstra's is guaranteed to be optimal.

#### **Proofs and Intuitions**
Assume all edges are non-negative.

- At start, distTo[source] = 0. This is optimal.
- After relaxing all edges from source, let vertex $v_1$ be the vertex with the minimum weight. **Claim: distTo[$v_1$] is optimal, i.e., whatever the value of distTo[$v_1$​] is at this point is the shortest distance from $s$ to $v_1$. Why?
  - Suppose that it isn't the case. Then that means that there is some other path from $s$ to $v_1$​ which is shorter than the direct path $(s, v_1)$. 
  - Ok, so let's consider this hypothetical cool shorter path... it would have to look like ($s, v_a, v_b, \ldots, v_1$). 
  - But ($s, v_a$) is already bigger than ($s, v_1$)(Note that this is true because $v_1$ is the vertex that is closest to ss from above.) 
  - So how can such a path exist which is actually shorter?
- Make this same argument for $v_1$ and all the relaxation it does.

#### **A noteworthy invariant**
Once a vertex is popped from the priority queue, we **know** the true shortest distance to that vertex from the source.

One nice consequence of this fact is "short-circuiting". So sometimes `dijkstra` takes in not only a source, but also a target. When the target is poped, the function returned.

## A*
`Dijkstra` only relys on the pure fact of the graph, but sometimes, we have a guess/experience that some vertices are prefered even they are at the low priority.

So, let's modify our Dijkstra's algorithm slightly. In Dijkstra's, we used $\texttt{bestKnownDistToV}$ as the priority in our algorithm. This time, we'll use $\texttt{bestKnownDistToV} + \texttt{estimateFromVToGoal}$ as our heuristic.

### Chicken And Egg
We have a problem. How do we know what the estimate is? I mean, the estimate itself is a distance, and we're using A* to **find** the distance from some node to some other node.

Well, it's called an estimate because it's exactly that. We use A* to get the true shortest path from a source to a target, but the estimate is something we approximate. Coming up with good estimates is hard sometimes.

### Good estimates (heuristics)
- Admissibility. heuristic(v, target) $\leq$ trueDistance(v, target). (Think about the problem above. The true distance from the neighbor of $C$ to $C$ wasn't infinity, it was much, much smaller. But our heuristic said it was $\infty$, so we broke this rule.)
- Consistency. For each neighbor $v$ of $w$:
  - heuristic(v, target) $\leq$ dist(v, w) + heuristic(w, target)
  - where dist(v, w) is the weight of the edge from v to w.