# Lecture
- [MST (see title) application](https://youtu.be/r_4Ei251fDU?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD7SvlWei_-neNmgmXzJG2ad&t=76)
- [SPT depends on the source node, MST is a property of the graph](https://youtu.be/50K-QvOHfOE?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD7SvlWei_-neNmgmXzJG2ad&t=149)
  - Find the vertex that will make SPT the MST.
  - Run dijkstra.
  - But for some graphs, this is [impossible](https://youtu.be/50K-QvOHfOE?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD7SvlWei_-neNmgmXzJG2ad&t=149)
- [Prim efficient](https://youtu.be/JoS9ZegarJs?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD7SvlWei_-neNmgmXzJG2ad&t=37)
  - Dijstra's algorithm visits vertices in order of distance of the source.
  - Prim's algorithm visits vertices in order of distance of the MST under construction.
- [Kruskal using Weighted Quick Union](https://youtu.be/hSf_jir40ho?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD7SvlWei_-neNmgmXzJG2ad&t=278)
- [Using "bottom-up heapification" to achieve O(E) insertion for PQ](https://youtu.be/4TV-b64HNaA?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD7SvlWei_-neNmgmXzJG2ad&t=137)
- [Pettie-Ramachandra algorithm for MST](https://youtu.be/OetLdLoEbKQ?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD7SvlWei_-neNmgmXzJG2ad&t=114)
  - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimum_spanning_tree#Optimal_algorithm
  - It's guaranteed to be optimal, almost $\Omega E$.
  - But nobody knows the runtime.

# Overview
**Minimum Spanning Trees.** Given an undirected graph, a spanning tree T is a subgraph of G, where T is connected, acyclic, includes all vertices. The minimum spanning tree is the spanning tree whose edge weights have the smallest sum. MSTs are similar to SPTs, but despite intuition suggesting it may be the case, for many graphs, the MST [is not the SPT for any particular vertex](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1eZ6sCoAY8d-PAfyyTRG_EQ-BBNqxmTyJ2vS10ZzsGYg/edit#slide=id.g5347e2c8f_20). (SPTs are relative to the source node)

**Cut Property.** If you divide the vertices up into two sets S and T (arbitrarily), then a crossing edge is any edge which has one vertex in S and one in T. Neat fact (the cut property): The minimum crossing edge for ANY cut is part of the MST.

**Prim’s Algorithm.** Dijkstra's algorithm but we consider distance from the entire tree, rather than from source.
```
relax(e):
    v = e.source
    w = e.target        
    currentBestKnownWeight = distTo(w)
    possiblyBetterWeight = e.weight // Only difference!
    if possiblyBetterWeight > currentBestKnownWeight
        Use e instead of whatever we were using before
```
Like Dijkstra’s, the runtime is O(E log V). We can prove that Prim’s works because of the cut property.

**Kruskal’s Algorithm.** 
```
Initialize the MST to be empty
Consider each edge e in INCREASING order of weight:
    If adding e to the MST does not result in a cycle, add it to e
```
That’s it! The runtime for Kruskal’s, assuming that we already have all of our edges in a sorted list and use a weighted quick union with path compression to detect cycles, is O(E log*V), or (E log E) if we have use a PQ instead. See slides for more details. We can prove that Kruskal’s works because of the cut property.

Completely unimportant technical note: We can actually make an even tighter bound than O(Elog∗V) if we use the inverse Ackermann bound for WQUPC.

# Minimum Spanning Trees
A minimum spanning tree (MST) is the lightest set of edges in a graph possible such that all the vertices are connected. Because it is a tree, it must be connected and acyclic. And it is called "spanning" since all vertices are included.

There cloud be multiple MSTs with the same weight sum.

## Cut Property
- We can define a cut as an assignment of a graph’s nodes to two non-empty sets (i.e. we assign every node to either set number one or set number two).

- We can define a crossing edge as an edge which connects a node from one set to a node from the other set.

- With these two definitions, we can understand the Cut Property; given any cut, the minimum weight crossing edge is in the MST.


The proof for the cut property is as follows: 
- Suppose that the minimum crossing edge `e` were not in the MST. 
- Since it is not a part of the MST, if we add that edge, a cycle will be created. Because there is a cycle, this implies that some other edge `f` must also be a crossing edge.
- (for a cycle, if `e` crosses from one set to another, there must be another edge that crosses back over to the first set) 
- Thus, we can remove `f` and keep `e`, and this will give us a lower weight spanning tree. 
- But this is a contradiction because we supposedly started with a MST, but now we have a collection of edges which is a spanning tree but that weighs less, thus the original MST was not actually minimal. As a result, the cut property must hold.

## Prim's Algorithm
This is one algorithm to find a MST from a graph. It is as follows:

1. Start from some arbitrary start node.
2. Repeatedly add the shortest edge that has one node inside the MST under construction.
3. Repeat until there are V-1 edges.

Prim's algorithm works because at all stages of the algorithm, if we take all the nodes that are part of our MST under construction as one set, and all other nodes as a second set, then this algorithm always adds the lightest edge that crosses this cut, which is necessarily part of the final MST by the Cut Property.

Dijkstra's considers candidate nodes by their distance from the source node, Prim's looks at each candidate node's distance from the MST under construction. Thus, the runtime of Prim's if done using the same mechanism as Dijkstra's, would be the same as Dijkstra's, which is $O((|V|+|E|) \log |V|)$. Remember, this is because we need to add to a priority queue fringe once for every edge we have (Change or not change the priority of a vertex), and we need to dequeue from it once for every vertex we have (Confirm the edge is in the MST).

## Kruskal's Algorithm
The algorithm is as follows:

1. Sort all the edges from lightest to heaviest.
2. Taking one edge at a time (in sorted order), add it to our MST under construction if doing so does not introduce a cycle.
3. Repeat until there are $V-1$ edges.

Kruskal's algorithm works because:
- Any edge we add will be connecting one node, which we can say is part of one set, and a second node, which we can say is part of a second set.
- This edge we add is not part of a cycle, because we are only adding an edge if it does not introduce a cycle.
- Further, we are looking at edge candidates in order from lightest to heaviest. Therefore, this edge we are adding must be the lightest edge across this cut.

Kruskal's runs in $O(|E| \log |E|)$ time because the bottleneck of the algorithm is sorting all of the edges to start (for example, we can use heap sort, in which we insert all of the edges into a heap and remove the min one at a time). If we are given pre-sorted edges and don't have to pay for that, then the runtime is $O(|E| \log^* |V|)$. This is because with every edge we propose to add, we need to check whether it will introduce a cycle or not. One way we know how to do this is by using Weighted Quick Union with Path Compression; this will efficiently tell us whether two nodes are connected (unioned) together already or not. This will cost $|E|$ calls on `isConnected`, which costs $O(\log^* |V|)$ each, where $\log^*$​ is the Ackermann function.