# Lecture
- [Rank - get index](https://youtu.be/KWsh6aLe_eE?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4F7nPFfgD0dGdLos1uhUPg&t=164)
- [Uniform Partitioning is not as good as Quadtrees and Kd-trees](https://youtu.be/FjeD8fLV7jw?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4F7nPFfgD0dGdLos1uhUPg&t=133)
  - 1D uniform partitioning is hashtable.
- [Applications](https://youtu.be/ogw3Ywy8ZYM?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4F7nPFfgD0dGdLos1uhUPg&t=68)
  - Murmuration
    - Boids
  - NBody Simulation
    - [Barnes-Hut](https://youtu.be/ogw3Ywy8ZYM?list=PL8FaHk7qbOD4F7nPFfgD0dGdLos1uhUPg&t=255)

# Overview
**Additional Set Operations** There are many other operations we might be interested in supporting on a set. For example, we might have a select(int i) method that returns the ith smallest item in the set. Or we might have a subSet(T from, T to) operation that returns all items in the set between from and to. Or if we have some notion of distance, we might have a nearest(T x) method that finds the closest item in the set to x.

On 1D data, it is relatively straightforward to support such operations efficiently. If we use only one of the coordinates (e.g. X or Y coordinate), the structure of our data will fail to reflect the full ordering of the data.

**QuadTrees** A natural approach is to make a new type of Tree– the QuadTree. The QuadTree has 4 neighbors, Northwest,Northeast, Southwest, and Southeast. As you move your way down the tree to support queries, it is possible to prune branches that do not contain a useful result.

**K-D Trees** One final data structure that we have for dealing with 2 dimensional data is the K-d Tree. Essentially the idea of a K-D tree is that it’s a normal Binary Search Tree, except we alternate what value we’re looking at when we traverse through the tree. For example at the root everything to the left has an X value less than the root and everything to the right has a X value greater than the root. Then on the next level, every item to the left of some node has a Y value less than that item and everything to the right has a Y value greater than it. Somewhat surprisingly, KdTrees are quite efficient.

# Q&A
- [Why we need `clear()`](https://youtu.be/NAz4u_DdSqI?t=360)
  - I just mimic the standard java library.
- [Study for the exam](https://sp19.datastructur.es/materials/guides/study-guide)
  - Having a person to argue about the solutions is a good way to turn base understanding into deep understanding.
- [Josh doesn't like Bourbaki way of teaching in this course](https://youtu.be/NAz4u_DdSqI?t=2050)
- [CS70 is notoriously difficult](https://youtu.be/NAz4u_DdSqI?t=3048)

# Uniform Partitioning
- First Question: 2D Range Finding
- Second Question: Nearest Neighbors

## Initial Attempt: HashTable
**Question:** If our set of suns were stored in a HashTable, what is the runtime for finding the answer to our Nearest Neighbors question?

**Solution:** The bucket that each object resides in is effectively random, and so we would have to iterate over all $N$ items to check if each sun could possibly be the closest to the horse. **\Theta(N)**.

## Second Attempt: Uniform Partitioning
If we uniformly partition our image space by throwing a 4x4 grid over it, we get nice organized buckets. (this is also sometimes called "spatial hashing")

This can be implemented by not using the object's `hashCode()` function, and instead having each object provide a `getX()` and `getY()` function so that it can compute its own bucket number.

Now, we know which grid cells our searches can be confined to, and we only have to look at suns in those particular cells rather than looking at all the suns in our entire image space as we had to before.

**Question:** Using uniform partitioning, what is the runtime for finding the answer to our Nearest Neighbors question, assuming the suns are evenly spread out?

**Solution:** On average, the runtime will be 1616 times faster than without spatial partitioning, but unfortunately $N \over 16$​ is still $\Theta (N)$. BUT, this does indeed work better in practice.

## Third Attempt: QuadTrees
One key advantage of Search Trees over Hash Tables is that trees explicitly track the order of items. For example, finding the minimum item in a BST is $\Theta(\log N)$ time, but $\Theta (N)$ in a hash table.

- We use four pointers to point the nodes at their corresponding locations: northwest, northeast, southeast, and southwest.
- Note that just like in a BST, the order in which we insert nodes determines the topology of the QuadTree.
- Also note that QuadTrees are a form of spatial partitioning in disguise. Similar to how uniform partitioning created a perfect grid before, QuadTrees **hierarchically** partition by having each node "own" 4 subspaces.
- With the 4-way division imposed by each node of the QuadTree, we still have the pruning effect.

## K-D Trees
Quad-Trees are great for 2-D spaces, because there are only 4 quadrants. However, what do we do if we want to move into higher dimension space?

We simply spreads all its $K$ dimensions to $K$ levels. So for the K-D case, it partitions like an $D_1$-based Tree on the first level, then like a $D_2$-based Tree on the next, then as an $D_3$-based Tree on third level, a $D_4$-based Tree on the fourth, etc.

But, no matter how high the dimensions get, a K-D tree will always be a binary tree, since each level is partitioned into "greater" and "less than".

For a demo on K-D tree insertion, check out these [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1WW56RnFa3g6UJEquuIBymMcu9k2nqLrOE1ZlnTYFebg/edit#slide=id.g54b6045b73_0_38).

### Nearest Neighbor using a K-D Tree
```
nearest(Node n, Point goal, Node best):
    If n is null, return best
    If n.distance(goal) < best.distance(goal), best = n
    If goal < n (according to n’s comparator):
        goodSide = n.”left”Child
        badSide = n.”right”Child
    else:
        goodSide = n.”right”Child
        badSide = n.”left”Child
    best = nearest(goodSide, goal, best)
    If bad side could still have something useful ***
        best = nearest(badSide, goal, best)
    return best

useful(Node n, point goal, Node best):
    return abs(n.getK() - goal.getK()) < best.distance(goal)
```

For a step by step walkthrough, see these [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1DNunK22t-4OU_9c-OBgKkMAdly9aZQkWuv_tBkDg1G4/edit)